question,option_1,option_2,option_3,option_4,answers,explanation,hint,status,level,,,
"Which of the following pairs are correctly matched?1.Lord Cornwallis- Enacted the Permanent Settlement system of revenue collection.2.Lord Wellesley- Adopted the policy of Subsidiary Alliance3.Charles Metcalfe- Liberator of Press4.Lord
Dalhousie- Father of Civil Services in IndiaSelect the correct answer using the codes given below."," 1, 2, 3 and 4", 2 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3 only", 1 and 4 only ,3,"Statement 4 is incorrect.
Lord Cornwallis is known as the Father of Civil Services in India.
Pitts India Act of 1784 of established the principles of governance in India. Lord Cornwallis (1786-93)splitted the bureaucracy into two parts. The political branch was responsible for civil governance and the commercial branch was responsible for commercial activities.
Knowledge base
LordCornwalis (1786-1793) introduced the Permanent settlement in Bengal.
Sir John Shore (1793-1798) was instrumental in enacting the Permanent Settlement system of revenue collection.",Hint 1,1,1,,,
Which of the following features can be associated with Indian judiciary during the British period?1.Judicial system became complicated.2.The rule of law was established.3.Codified laws were introduced. Which of the statements given above is/are correct?," 1, 2 and 3", 1 and 3 only, 1 only, 2 and 3 only,4,"Statement 2 is correct. The concept of Rule of Law was propounded byA.V.Dicey, a British jurist and it is believed that it was introduced into India by the British, which was awell accepted doctrine in Europe. The Rule of law is awell accepted doctrine in India and is quintessential in the successful functioning of any democracy in the world.
Statement 3 is correct. A Law Commission was set up under Macaulay or codification of Indian laws. As a result, a Civil Procedure Code (1859), an Indian Penal Code (1860) and a Criminal. Procedure Code (1861) was prepared. Thus, the codified laws replaced the religious and personal laws of the rulers.",Hint 2,1,2,,,
"Which of the following can be attributed to the growth of Communalism at the end of 19th Century?1.Growth of Militant Nationalism divided society on communal grounds.2.Economic backwardness of the country also played a role in growth of communalism.3.High unemployment among the educated led to appeal for reservation based on religion, caste and province to secure larger share in existing limited employment opportunities.Select the correct answer using the codes given below."," 1, 2 and 3 only", 1 and 3 only, 2 and 3 only, 1 and 2 only,4,"Statement 1 is correct. Militant Nationalism divided society on communal grounds.
The minority communalism met with a reaction from the majority community which set up militant organizations like the HinduMahasabha(established in 1915) andRashtriyaSwayamsevakSangh (RSS— established in 1925).
The resultant one-upmanship of different versions of communal tendencies was one factor which deterred any effective counter-offensive against communalism.
Statement 2 and 3 is correct. The professional classes and the bourgeoisie emerged later among the Muslims than among the Hindus. There was rivalry for jobs, trade and industry between the two communities. The Muslim bourgeoisie used all the lower middle classes of the Muslims against the Hindu bourgeoisie to further their class interests. Because of the economicbackwardness of India and rampant unemployment, there was ample scope for the colonial government to use concessions, favours and reservations to fuel communal and separatist tendencies. Also, modern political consciousness was late in developing among the Muslims andthe dominance of traditional reactionary elements over the Muslim masses helped a communal outlook to take root.",Hint 3,1,3,,,
Match the following set of pairs:NameCultural WorkA. William Jones1.Planning of Archaeological Survey of IndiaB. James Princep2.Translationof Laws ofManuin EnglishC. Alexander3.Copying Cunninghaminscriptionsin Dharwad regionD. Walter Elliot4.Deciphering Brahmiand Kharoshti ScriptSelect the correct answer using the codes given below:," A – 4, B – 2, C – 3, D – 1"," A – 4, B – 2, C – 1, D – 3"," A – 2, B – 4, C – 1, D – 3"," A – 2, B – 4, C – 3, D – 1",2,All pairs are self-explanatory.,Hint 4,1,1,,,
Which of the following objectives led British to wage wars with Afghanisthan?1.To serve as a base for Central Asia in their quest for territorial expansion.2.To check French military influence. Select the correct answer using the code given below., 1 only, 2 only, Both 1 and 2, Neither 1 nor 2,1,"Statement 1 is correct. British waged wars withAfghanisthan to check Russiasaggresiveness and to support their military adventure in centralasia. They wanted to makeafghanisthan as a buffer state between them.
Statement 2 is incorrect. Anglo - Russian Rivalry was the root cause behind the afghan adventure of British in19th century.",Hint 5,1,2,,,
"With reference to India in the 18th century, what does misls refer to?", Land grants given under Mansabdari system, Sikh confederacies, Tax imposed by Marathas on conquered territories, None of the above,2,"Thesikhs in the 18th century were organised into 12misls or confederacies, which operated in different parts of the province. Thesemisls fully cooperated with one another. They were originally based on the principle of quality with all members having an equal voice in deciding the affairs of themisl and in electing its chief and other officers. However, gradually the democratic and plebeian character of themisls disappeared and powerful feudal chiefs and zamindars dominated them.
Ranjit Singh, who rose to prominence at the end of the 18th century, was the chief ofSukerchakiaMisl.",Hint 6,1,3,,,
Consider the following statements:1.Lord Macaulay headed the first Law commission to codify Indian Laws.2.Charles Wood proposed Downward Filtration theory for the education of Indians.3.William Bentinck tried to abolish female Infanticide.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?, 1 and 2 only, 2 only, 1 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3",3,"Statement 1 is correct: Lord Macaulay headed the first Law commission to codify Indian Laws. Statement 2 is incorrect: Charles wood rejected this theory and made government responsible for spreading of education.
Statement 3 is correct: Lord William Bentinck and Warren Hastings enforced regulations prohibiting the female infanticide sternly.",Hint 7,1,1,,,
"Which of the following statements are correct regarding Pitts India Act, 1784?1.It led to formation of Board of Control to guide and control the work of Court of Directors.2.It subordinated the Bombay and Madras Presidency to Bengal in questions of war, diplomacy and revenue.3.Company retained its monopoly over trade in China but lost its monopoly over trade in India except for tea.Select the correct answer using the code given below:", 1 and 2 only, 1 only, 2 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3",1,"Statement 1 is correct. It established six commissioners for the affairs of India, popularly known as the Board of Control, including two Cabinet ministers. The board of Control was to guide and control the work of the Court of Directors and the Government of India.
Statement 2 is correct. The Act clearly subordinated the Bombay and Madras Presidencies to Bengal in all questions of war, diplomacy and revenues.
Statement 3 is incorrect because company retainedits monopoly of both India and china in this act, this statement is true for Charter Act of 1813",Hint 8,1,2,,,
Lord Wellesleys expansion policy was discontinued by East India Company for which of the following reasons?1.Expansion through war was costly and was reducing the profit of company.2.Napoleon emerged as a major threat in Europe at that time.3.The Company decided to reward the loyalty of the princely states.Select the correct answer using the code given below., 1 and 2 only, 2 only, 1 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3",1,"1.Statement 1 is correct. Company discovered that expansion through war was very costly and it isincreasing the debt, so they checked this policy.
2.Statement 2 is correct : When Napoleon was becoming the threat in Europe, Britain economic condition was not prudent. oStatement 3 is not correct. It was the reason to discontinue annexation after revolt of 1857.",Hint 9,1,3,,,
Consider the following statements with regard to Haider Ali:1.He introduced the Mughal administrative and revenue system.2.He introduced new system of coinage and new scales of weights and measures in Mysore.3.He established a modern arsenel in Dindigal with the help of french experts. Which of the statement given above is/are correct?, 1 only, 1 and 3 only, 2 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3",2,"statement 1 is correct as themughal administrative & revenue system was introduced byHaider Ali. Statement 2 is incorrect becauseHaiderali is notresponcible for these types of changes in the state of Statement 1 is correct. It established six commissioners for the affairs of India, popularly known as the Board of Control, including two Cabinet ministers. The board of Control was to guide and control the work of the Court of Directors and the Government of India.
Statement 2 is correct. The Act clearly subordinated the Bombay and Madras PresidenciestoBengali all questions of war, diplomacy and revenues.
Statement 3 is incorrect because company retainedits monopoly of both India and china in this act, this statement is true for Charter Act of 1813",Hint 10,1,1,,,
Which of the following statements is/are correct regarding the Permanent settlement of Bengal introduced by Lord Cornwallis?1.Zamindars and revenue collectors were made owners of the lands in their zamindaris.2.The ownership of land was made hereditary and transferable.3.The land revenue to be paid by the peasants to zamindars was fixed.Select the correct answer using the code given below., 1 and 2 only, 1 and 3 only, 2 only," 1, 2 and 3",1,"Statement 1 is correctThe zamindars and revenue collectors were converted into landlords. They were not onlyonly to act asagnts of thegovenment in collecting land revenue fromryot but also became the owners of entire lands intheire zamindaris
Statement 2 is correct. Their right of ownership was madeherediatry and transferable.
Statement 3 is incorrect. The land revenue to be paid by the peasants to zamindars was not fixed. The zamindars were to give 10/11th of the rental they derived from thepeasentry to the state, keeping only 1/11th for themselves. But the sums to be paid by them to the state as land revenue were fixed in perpetuity.",Hint 11,1,2,,,
TreatyofSalbaiwassignedbetween, British and Marathas, British and Hyder Ali, British and Nawab of Awadh, British and Nizam of Hyderabad,2,Treaty ofSalbai was signed in 1782 between British and Maratha after the first Anglo-Maratha war. Both side maintained status quo.,Hint 12,1,3,,,
Which of following were the demands of 19th century nationalists raised against the colonial pattern of finance?1.Abolition of Salt Tax.2.Reduction of land revenue.3.Imposition of Income Tax on the rich. Select the correct answer using code given below., 1 and 2 only, 1 and 3 only, 2 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3",4,"Thetarrif policy of government convinced the nationalists that British economic policies in India were basically guided by theintrests of British capitalist class & government was raising taxes to overburdden poor while letting the rich foreign capitalist free.
The early nationalist strongly criticised the colonial pattern of finance and demanded abolition of Salt Tax, reduction of land revenue, imposition of Income Tax on rich & middle classes. Thus option d is correct one",Hint 13,1,1,,,
Which of the following reasons can be attributed to English victory in the Battle of Plassey?1.The Nawabs of Bengal failed to understand that East India company was no mere company of traders.2.The Nawabs of Bengal neglected to build a strong modern army.3.Bengal administration failed to check the growing corruption among their officials.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?, 2 only, 2 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3", 1 and 3 only,4,"Statement 1 is correct.Nawabs did not have any exposure to external world and they were not aware of English exploits in Africa. They failed to understand that East Indiacompany was no mere company oftraders.
Statement 2 is correct.Nawabs completely ignored the modernization of their army.
Statement 3 is also correct. Corruption was one weak point which English exploited in their favour.",Hint 14,1,2,,,
Dual Government was established in Bengal as an immediate effect of which of the following event ?, Battle of Plassey, Third Carnatic War, Battle of Buxar," Regulating Act, 1773 ",3,"After the Battle ofBuxar, in 1764, the Company, which till now had purely trading functions, obtained thediwani (i.e., rights over revenue and civil justice) of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. From 1765-72 ,there was dual government under which Indian officials were allowed tofuntion as before but under the overall control of British Governor and British Officials.",Hint 15,1,3,,,
Consider the following statements with regard to Tipu Sultan:1.He planted Tree of liberty at Srirangpattanam.2.He was a member of Jacobin Club of France.3.He organised his army on European lines.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?, 1only, 1 and 2 only, 2 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3",4,"Statement 1 is correct: Tipu Sultan has keenintrest in thefrench revolution & thus planted Tree of liberty at Srirangpattanam. Statement 2 is correct: He was a member of Jacobin Club of France.
Statement 3 is also correct: He tried to develop army of European manner. The infantry in army was armed with muskets and bayonets in the European fashion",Hint 16,1,1,,,
Which among the following factors helped expansion of East India Company in south Indian peninsula?1.Declining control of Mughal Empire after death of Aurangzeb.2.The regular raids by the Maratha chiefs in south weakened the area economically and politically.3.French army helped the English  East India Company to Invade Mysore and Hyderabad.Select the correct answer using the code given below., 1 and 2 only, 2 only, 1 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3",1,"Statements 1 is correct because after death of Aurangzeb Mughal ruler were not as capable to hold control over Indiaspecially in Southern peninsula.
Statement 2 is correct. The Marathas chiefs used to invade Hyderabad and the rest of south India for collectingchauth. These raids resulted in politically unsettled conditions and administrative disorganisation.
Statement 3 is incorrect because French were the biggest rival ofBritishers in India and they fought 3 Carnatic wars withBritishers",Hint 17,1,2,,,
Consider the following pairs:PolicyIntroduced by1.Dualsystemof: Robert CliveadministrationofBengal2.Subsidiary Alliance: Lord Hastings3.Doctrine of Lapse: Lord DalhousieWhich of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?, 1 and 3 only, 2 and 3 only, 2 only," 1, 2 and 3",1,"Pair 1 is correctly matched. The system of dual government was introduced by Robert Clive, and this system remained in practice during the period from 1765 1772.
Pair 2 is not correctly matched. Lord Wellesley introduced subsidiary alliance under thebritish rule in order to bring as many Indian states aspossible under the British rule
Pair 3 is correctly matched. Lord Dalhousie used Doctrine of Lapse as a tool for the implementation of his policy of annexation",Hint 18,1,3,,,
The British tried to bring which of the following social reforms by lawful means?1.Abolition of practice of sati.2.Remarriage of Hindu widows.3.Prohibition of female infanticide.Select the correct answer using the code given below., 1 and 2 only, 1 only, 2 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3",4,"William Bentinck in 1829 abolished the practice of sati.
Britishgovernment passed the law in 1856 that enabled Hindu widows to remarry.
Regulations prohibiting female infanticide had been passed in 1795 and 1802, but they were sternly enforced by Bentinck and Harding.",Hint 19,1,1,,,
Which one of the following is the correct chronological order of the battle fought in India in the 18th Century?, Battle of Wandiwash - Battle of Buxar - Battle of Plassey., Battle of Plassey - Battle of Wandiwash-Battle of Buxar., Battle of Wandiwash - Battle of Plassey-Battle of Buxar., Battle of Buxar - Battle of Wandiwash - Battle of Plassey.,2,"The correct orderis :
Battle of Plassey (1757) - Battle ofWandiwash (1760) - Battle ofBuxar (1764)",Hint 20,1,2,,,
Who among the following Europeans were the last to come to pre independence India as traders?, Dutch, English, French, Portuguese,2,Entry of European powers in India: Portuguese - 1548 English - 1600 Dutch - 1602 Danish - 1616 French - 1664.,Hint 21,1,3,,,
The establishment of Hyderabad in 1724 by Nizam-ul-Mulk marked the, Increasing influence of Mughal Emperor in South India, Beginning of physical break up of Mughal Empire., Delegation of administrative authority to local noble., Shift of power center from North India to South India.,2,Nizam -ul -Mulk who served asWajir for two years in Mughal Court established Hyderabad. Agitated by the lacklustre attitude of Mughal Emperor andinablity to reform administration during the time of Muhammad shah forced him to carve his own province to rule. It marked the beginning of physical break up of Mughal Empire.,Hint 22,1,1,,,
"With reference to Subsidiary Alliance during the companys rule, consider the following statements:1.Under the system the ruler of Indian state was compelled to accept permanent stationing of a British force.2.Under this system, British promised not to interfere in the internal affairs of the state.3.Indian states were not allowed to employ any European without the approval of British.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?", 1 and 2 only, 1 and 3 only, 3 only," 1, 2 and 3",4,"Statement 1 is correct. A British force was permanently stationed in an Indian state and the Indian state would pay for their maintenance. Statement 2 is correct. Under the system, the British undertook to defend the ruler of Indian state from his enemies. They also promised non-interference in the internal affairs of the allied state, but this was a promise they seldom kept
Statement 3 is correct. In this treaty Indian rulers usually agreed to the posting at their court of a British resident and that they would not employ any European in their service without the approval of British.",Hint 23,1,2,,,
Which of the following statements is correct regarding the Lex Loci Act of 1850?, It prohibited child marriage below the age of 14., It extended the prohibition of Sati across all over British India., It provided right to inherit ancestral property to Hindu converts to Christianity., It granted the legal recognition to widows marriage,3,"The Lex Loci act was proposed in 1845 and passed in 1850. It provided right to inherit ancestral property to Hindu converts to Christianity. The conversion issue was becoming important for Christian Missionaries as loss of inheritance rights was impeding the success of conversion because then that wouldmean few Hindus will going to convert, if they lost their property as a result.
However, a similar law was passed by Lord Bentinck in 1832, however, it applied to Bengal only.",Hint 24,1,3,,,
"With reference to rebellions against British, consider the following statements:1.There was no major armed rebellion before 1857.2.The scholarly and priestly class often incited the rebellion against the British rule.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?", 1 only, 2 only, Both 1 and 2, Neither 1 nor 2,2,"Statement 1 is incorrect. There was hardly a year without armed opposition or a decade without a major armed rebellion in one part of the country or the other. From 1763 to 1856, there were more than forty major rebellions apart from hundreds of minor ones.
Statement 2 is correct. The traditional rulers and ruling elite had financially supported scholars, religious preachers, priests,pandits andmaulvis and men of arts and literature. With the coming of the British andthe ruin of the traditional landed and bureaucratic elite, this patronage came to an end, and all those who had depended on it were impoverished. So, the scholarly and priestly classes were also active in inciting, not assuaging, hatred and rebellion against foreign rule.",Hint 25,1,1,,,
"With reference to royal farman issued by Mughal emperor Farrukh Siyyar to British East India Company in 1717, consider the following statements:1.It allowed British East India Company to import and export their goods in Bengal without paying taxes.2.British East India Company was allowed to issue dastaks for movement of goods.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?", 1 only, 2 only, Both 1 and 2, Neither 1 nor 2,3,"Statement 1 is correct. The company had secured valuable privileges in 1717 under a royalfarman by the Mughal emperor, which had granted the company the freedom to export and import their goods in Bengal without paying taxes.
Statement 2 is correct. It also gave the company the right to issue passes ordastaks for movement of such goods.",Hint 26,1,2,,,
"Consider the following statements regarding consequences of Battle of Plassey:1.Mir Qasim was made Nawab of Bengal by the British.2.British East India Company was granted undisputed right to free trade in Bengal, Bihar and Orissa.3.Company received zamidari rights of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa.Which of the statement(s) given above is/are correct?", 1 and 2 only, 2 only, 1 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3",2,"Statement 1 is incorrect because after the battle ofplassy, MirJafar was made the newNawab of Bengal. Statement 2 is correct. British East India Company was granted right to free trade in Bengal, Bihar and Orissa.
Statement 3 is incorrect because Company receivedZamidari rights of 24parganas near Calcutta in Bengal.",Hint 27,1,3,,,
"Through the Treaty of Lahore, British gained full control over Punjab. Which of the following is/are the reasons for the defeat of Punjab?1.The Punjab army was very in disciplined.2.Some important leaders from Punjab turned traitors.3.Absence of any unity among Hindus, Muslims and Sikh during war time.Select the correct answer using the code given below.", 1 only, 2 and 3 only, 1 and 2 only," 1, 2 and 3",3,"Statement 1 is correct. The Punjab army was brave and patriotic butindisciplined.
Statement 2 is correct. The Prime Minister and the Commander-in-chief of Punjab were secretly corresponding with the enemy. Statement 3 is incorrect. At the war time Hindu, Muslim, Sikh all united and fought heroically and with exemplary courage.",Hint 28,1,1,,,
"With reference to the Ryotwari settlement, consider the following statements:1.The cultivator was to be recognised as the owner of his plot of land.2.The settlement under this system was not made permanent.3.It was introduced in Punjab and theNorth-West provinces.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?", 1 and 2 only, 2 and 3 only, 1 only, 2 only,1,"1.Statement 1 is correct: Under the system, the cultivator was to be recognised as the owner of his plot of land subject to the payment of land revenue. However, in practice, theRyotwari Settlement did not bring into existence a system of peasant ownership. The peasant soon discovered that the large number ofzamindars had been replaced by one giantzamindar—the state.
2.Statement 2 is correct: The settlement under theRyotwari system was not made permanent. It was revised periodically after 20 to 30 years when the revenue demand was usually raised.
3.Statement 3 is not correct: TheRyotwari Settlement was introduced in parts of the Madras and Bombay Presidencies in the beginning of the 19th century. A modified version of the zamindari settlement, introduced in the Gangetic valley, the North-West Provinces, parts of Central India, and the Punjab, was known as theMahalwari System.",Hint 29,1,2,,,
Consider the following Pairs:Famous uprisingLeaders1.Santhal:Sido and Kanhu2.Bhil uprisings:Sewaram3.Ahom revolt:Gomdhar KonwarWhich of the above pairs is/are correctly matched?, 1 only, 1 and 2 only, 2 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3",4,"1.All the pairs are correctly matched.
2.TheSanthals ofRajmahal hills resented the oppression by revenue officials, Police, money-lenders,landlords ingeneral,by the ?outsiders whom they called ?diku under the leadership ofSido andKanhu.
3.Bhil uprising, was famous uprising in Western India –TheBhils,an aboriginal tribe concentrated aroundKhandesh revolted against east India company,One of their famous leader wasSewaram. TheBhils revolted in 1817-19, and again in 1825,1836 and 1846.
4.AhomRevolt:The British had pledged to withdraw after the First Burma War (1824 -26) fromAssam.But,after thewar,Instead ofwithdrawing,the British attempted to incorporate theAhoms territories in the companysdominion.This sparked off a rebellion in 1828 under the leadership ofGomdharKonwar.",Hint 30,1,3,,,
"With reference to the efforts during the British rule 1770s-1820s) to promote western education in India, consider the following statements:1.TheCharterActof 1793grantedpermissionto the Christian missionaries to freely enter India and spread western education.2.The East India Company never favoured Indian traditional education and always promoted modern Western education.3.The Charter Act of 1813 provided finances for the promotion of knowledge of the sciences in India.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?", 1 and 2 only, 1 and 3 only, 3 only, None of the above,3,"1.Statement 1 is not correct: It was Charter Act of 1813 that allowed the Christian missionaries to travel to India Prior to the 1813 Act, the Christian missionaries were banned from entering India for the fear of arousing political unrest due to theirproseylitisation activity. Despite the ban, the missionaries continued to use various ingenuous means to arrive in India and work for the dissemination of the Western education and the consequentproseylitisation.
2.Statement 2 is not correct: The early policy of the East India Company was that of noninternvention in Indian social matters. Along with pragmatism that demanded continuation of existing systems, there was also a respect for traditional Indian culture that expressed itself in Warren Hastings policy of Orientalism. The result of this endeavour was the establishment of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, the Calcutta Madrassa and the Sanskrit College ofBenaras. Knowledge about the subject population, their social customs, manners and codes were regarded as a necessary prerequisite for developing permanent institutions of rule. However, with the end of the Hastings tenure, there began cautious intervention in the Indian social institutions under the ideological influences from the Britain such as Evangelicalism, Utilitarianism and free trade thinking.
3.Statement 3 is correct: The beginning of western education in India can be dated from Charter Act of 1813, which provided for the allocation of one hundred thousand rupees per year for two specific purposes: first, ?the encouragement of the learned natives of India and the revival of and improvement of literature; secondly, the promotion of a knowledge of the sciences amongst the inhabitants of that country. The Act did not provide for the medium of instruction. The provision that the teaching of western sciences and literature through the medium of English language was provided by Lord Macaulays minute, 1835.",Hint 31,1,1,,,
Which among the following happened during Lyttons time?1.Grand Delhi Durbar2.Vernacular Press Act3.Indian Universities Act4.Official Secrets Act5.Arms ActSelect the correct answer using the code given below., 1 and 2 only," 2, 4 and 5 only"," 1, 2 and 5 only"," 1, 3, 4 and 5 only",3,"Important events during Lord Lyttons time (1876-1880)
1.Famine of 1876-78 affecting Madras, Bombay, Mysore, Hyderabad, parts of central India and Punjab.appointment of Famine Commission under the presidency of Richard Strachey(1878).
2.Royal Titles Act (1876), Queen Victoria assuming the title of Kaiser-i-Hind or Queen Empress of India.
3.The Vernacular Press Act (1878)
4.The Arms Act (1878)
5.The Second Afghan War (1878-80).",Hint 32,1,2,,,
Which of the following was/were the consequences of the acceptance of Policy ofSubsidiary Alliance by an Indian state?1.Indian State lost its right of maintaining diplomatic relations with other states.2.Deterioration of economy of Indian states under subsidiary alliance.3.Disbandment of states army and increase in unemployment.Select the correct answer using the code given below., 1 and 2 only, 2 only, 1 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Statement 1 is correct. By signing a subsidiary alliance, an Indian state virtually signed away its independence. It lost the right ofself defence, maintaining diplomatic relations, of employing foreign experts, and settling its disputes with its neighbours.
2.Statement 2 is correct. The system tended to bring about internal decay of the protected states. The cost of subsidiary force provided by the British was very high, much beyond the paying capacity of state and that increased burden on people for its collection and hence it degraded the economy and impoverished the people.
3.Statement 3 is correct because the subsidiary alliance policy led to disbandment of states armies and lakhs of Soldiers lost their livelihood as British soldiers replaced them.",Hint 33,1,3,,,
Which of the following was/were the roles played by the Indian Army during Britishrule in India?1.It defended the British Empire from foreign rivals such as Dutch East India company army.2.It safeguarded the British supremacy from the internal revolts.3.It was used for extending and defending the British Empire in Africa.Select the correct answer using the code given below., 1 only, 1 and 2 only, 2 and 3 only," 1, 2, and 3",4,"British Army in India fulfilled four important functions, viz. it was the instrument through which the Indian powers were conquered; it defended the British Empire in India from foreign rivals; it safeguarded British supremacy from ever present threat of internal revolt and it was the chief instrument for extending and defending the British Empire in Asia and Africa.",Hint 34,1,1,,,
Consider the following statements regarding Aravippuram Movement:1.It was a movement for widowremarriage launched in Madras Presidency.2.It demanded separate representation for the lower castes in the legislature in Madras.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?, 1 only, 2 only, Both 1 and 2, Neither 1 nor 2,4,"1.Aravippuram Movement: On the occasion ofSivarathri in 1888, Sri Narayan Guru, despite belonging to a lower caste installed an idol of Siva atAavippuram inKerela in his effort to show that the consecration of a gods image was not a monopoly of the Brahmins. The event inspired several socio-religious reform movements in the South, especially the Temple Entry Movement.
2.Statement 1 is not correct: A movement for the support of widow remarriage was launched in Madras Presidency byVeerasalingamPantulu.
3.Statement 2nd is not correct: Justice Movement: It was started byMudaliar, Nair andTyagaraja. It demanded separate representation for the lower castes in the legislature in Madras Presidency through Madras Presidency Association in 1917.",Hint 35,1,2,,,
"With regard to the Charter Act of 1853,consider the following statements:1.The Governor- General of Bengal was made  the Governor-General of India.2.It abolished East India Company?s monopoly of Indian trade.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?", 1 only, 2 only, Both 1 and 2, Neither 1 nor 2,4,"1.Statement 1 is not correct: the Governor- General of Bengal was made the Governor-General of India by the Charter Act of 1833. Lord William Bentick was the first governor-general of India.
2.Statement 2 is not correct: The Charter Act 1813 abolished East India Companys monopoly of Indian trade and not the Charter Act of 1853. The Charter Act of 1853 empowered the British East Indiacompany to retain the territories and revenues in India in trust for the Crown not for any specified period as preceding Charter Acts have provided but only until the Parliament should otherwise direct. This was framed on the basis of the reports of the select committees of enquiry in 1852.
3.Raja Ram Mohan Roys England visit and petitions of Bombay Association and Madras Native Association resulted into Charter Act of 1853.",Hint 36,1,3,,,
Which of the following statements regardingMacaulay?s Minute on Education is/are correct?1.It became a blueprint for introduction of English education in India.2.It favored the Anglicists view point on medium of instruction of education.3.It promoted the idea of downward filtration theory of education in India.Select the correct answer using the code given below., 1 only, 1 and 3 only, 2 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Statement 1 is correct. It was believed that modernisation of India would come through English education and the dissemination of knowledge of the Western sciences. When William Bentinck, a Utilitarian reformist, took over as governor general in 1828 and Thomas Babington Macaulay was appointed the law member in his council in 1834, the latter was immediately appointed the President of the General Committee of Public Instruction. On 2 February 1835 he issued his famous Minute on
Indian Education, which became the blueprint for the introduction of English education in India. Full of contempt for Oriental learning, Macaulays Minute asserted that a single shelf of a good European library was worth the whole native literature of India and Arabia. What he advocated, therefore, for the Indians was an education in European literature and sciences, inculcated through the medium of English language. Such an education, he argued, would create a class of persons between us and the millions whom we govern, a class of persons Indian in blood and colour, but English in taste, in opinions, in morals and intellect. Bentinck immediately endorsed his proposals in an executive order of 7 March 1835, and did not budge from this position despite loud protests from the Orientalists,
2.Statement 2 is correct. ORIENTALIST-ANGLICIST CONTROVERSY Within the General Committee on Public Instruction, the Anglicists argued that the government spending on education should be exclusively for modern studies. The Orientalists said while western sciences and literature should be taught to prepare students to take up jobs, emphasis should be placed on expansion of traditional Indian learning. Even the Anglicists were divided over the question of medium of instruction—one faction was for English language as the medium, while the other faction was for Indian languages (vernaculars) for the purpose. Unfortunately there was a great deal of confusion over English and vernacular languages as media of instruction and as objects of study. Lord Macaulays Minute (1835), This famous minute settled the row in favour of Anglicists—the limited government resources were to be devoted to teaching of western sciences and literature through the medium of English language alone.
3.Statement 3 is correct. The British planned to educate a small section of upper and middle classes, thus creating a class Indian in blood and colour but English in tastes, in opinions, in morals and in intellect who would act as interpreters between the Government and masses and would enrich the vernaculars by which knowledge of western sciences and literature would reach the masses. This was called the downward filtration theory. Modern ideas, if not education, did filter down to the masses, though not in a form desired by the rulers, but through political parties, press, pamphlets, public platforms, etc. Modern education only helped this process by making available the basic literature on physical and social sciences to nationalists, thus stimulating their capacity to make social analysis—otherwise the content, structure and curricula of modern education served colonial interests.",Hint 37,1,1,,,
"With reference to the Dual system ofadministrationprevalentinBengalinthe 18th century,considerthefollowingstatements:1.The Nawab controlled the defense of Bengal, while the East India Company controlled its finances.2.The separation of power resulted in efficient administration and checked the drain of wealth.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?", 1 only, 2 only, Both 1 and 2, Neither 1 nor 2,4,"1.Statement 1 is not correct: The East India Company became real master of Bengal from 1765. EICs army was in sole control of its defence and the supreme political power was in its hands. TheNawab depended for his internal and external security on the British.
2.Statement 2 is not correct: TheNawab and his officials had the responsibility of administration but not the power to discharge it. The - weaknesses of the Government could be blamed on the Indians while its fruits were gathered by the British. The consequences for the people of Bengal were disastrous: neither the Company nor theNawab cared for their welfare. The Companys servants had now the whole Bengal to themselves and the oppression of the people increased greatly.",Hint 38,1,2,,,
"With reference to the Doctrine of Lapse, consider the following statements:1.It was introduced by Lord Hastings.2.It allowed British to annex the state if the ruler of a protected state died without a natural heir.3.Avadh was the first state to be annexed under the doctrine.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?", 1 and 2 only, 1 and 3 only, 2 only," 1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Statement 1 is not correct: The Doctrine of Lapse was introduced by Lord Dalhousie. It was the chief instrument of his policy of annexation.
2.Statement 2 is correct: Under this Doctrine, when the ruler of a protected state died without a natural heir, his state was not to pass to an adopted heir as sanctioned by the age-old tradition of the country. Instead, it was to be annexed to the British dominions unless the adoption had been clearly approved earlier by the British authorities. Many states, includingSataia in 1848 and Nagpur and Jhansi in 1854, were annexed by applying this doctrine.
3.Statement 3 is not correct:Satara was the first state to be annexed under the Doctrine of Lapse. Lord Dalhousie was keen on annexing the kingdom of Avadh. But the task presented certain difficulties. For one, theNawabs of Avadh had been British allies since the Battle ofBuxar, Moreover, they had been most obedient to the British over the years. TheNawab of Avadh had many heirs and could not therefore be covered by the Doctrine of Lapse. Some other pretext had to be found for depriving him of his dominions. Finally, Lord Dalhousie hit upon the idea of alleviating the plight ofthe people of Avadh.NawabWajid Ali Shah was accused of having misgoverned his state and of refusing to introduce reforms. His state was therefore annexed in 1856.",Hint 39,1,3,,,
"With regard to Warren Hastings, considerthe following statements:1.He facilitated the establishment of Ryotwari System  in Madras.2.He believed in the policy of Orientalism as a means of governance of the natives.3.The defeat of British in the Second Anglo-Mysore War was a reason for hisimpeachment in England.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?", 1 and 2 only, 1 and 3 only, 2 only," 1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Statement 1 is not correct: TheRyotwari System was established during the tenure of Lord Hastings by
ThomasMunro.Warren Hastings introduced a new system of revenue collection known as thefarmingsystem in 1772. Under this system, European District Collectors, as the nomenclature suggested, were to be in charge of revenue collection, while the revenue collecting right was farmed out to the highest bidders. The farming system failed toimproved the situation (of shortage of revenue for Companys expenditure) as the farmers tried to extract as much as possible without any concern for the production process. The burden of revenue demand on the peasants increased as a result and often it was so onerous that it could not be collected at all. The net outcome was the ruination of the agricultural population.
2.Statement 2 is correct: Warren Hastings policy of Orientalism was an expression of his respect for traditional Indian culture and political pragmatism. He held that in order to establish permanent institutions of rule, knowledge about the subject population, their social customs, manners and codes, was a prerequisite. This led to the establishment of Asiatic Society of Bengal, the Calcutta Madrassa and the Sanskrit College atBenaras. This trend, however, started deteriorating with the end of Hastings rule.
3.Statement 3 is not correct: The FirstRohilla war became a matter of Westminster politics during the Impeachment of Warren Hastings. Warren Hastings was impeached in England on charges related to theRohilla War, the Case of Nanda Kumar, the treatment of Raja Chait Singh of Benares and the pressures on the Begums of Oudh.
4.Nanda Kumar was an influential official in Bengal. He was hanged to death by the verdict of the Supreme Court at Calcutta for a petty offence of forgery. It was contended that Warren Hastings and the judge of the Supreme Court conspired against Nanda Kumar.
5.Warren Hastings imposed heavy penalty on the Raja Chait Singh of Benares for his delay in payment of tribute and deposed him in an unjust manner.
6.The Begums of Oudh were mother and grandmother of theNawab of Oudh. Warren Hastings helped theNawab by sending his troops to the help ofNawab who squeeze money from the Begums.",Hint 40,1,1,,,
Arrange the following kingdoms in the order of their conquest by the British East India Company.1.Bengal2.Maratha3.Mysore4.PunjabSelect the correct answer using the code given below., 1-2-3-4, 3-1-2-4, 4-3-2-1, 1-3-2-4,4,"The British East India Company acquired its foothold firmly in Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa by its victories in the battles of Plassey (1757) andBuxar (1765). In 1799 the British marched onSeringapatam,Tipus capital, and defeated his troops. The British annexed much of Mysore outright; they controlled the remainder through a new sultan they installed. After a series of battles (1775-1782, 1803-1805,1817- 1818) with the Marathas, the British also succeeded in bringing Maratha lands under their control. After two wars with the Sikhs, the Sikh state of Punjab was added in 1849.",Hint 41,1,1,,,
"With reference to modern India, dadani merchants were", Merchants from Bengal who carried out British opium trade to China., Merchants in Bengal who worked on advance payments., Merchants in South India who acted as agents to tranfer money through hundi system, Merchants in South India carrying out trade in cotton and spices.,2,"Dadani merchants were merchants who worked on advance payments ordadan. There was a natural communion of interests between the Indian mercantile community and the European traders in Bengal, as many of the Indian merchants were operating in collaboration with the English Company and private traders, acting as theirdadani merchants supplying them textiles from the interior in exchange for advances ordadan.",Hint 42,1,2,,,
"During occupation of Bengal under dual government by the East India company, the term investments refers to ?", Purchasing of Indian goods out of revenue of Bengal and to export them to England., Purchasing of Arms and ammunition out of revenue of Bengal for strengthening military strength., Money used for the development of agriculture in Bengal., Recruitment of additional artillery battalion out of revenue of Bengal.,1,"1.During the dual government arrangement of East India Company the term investments refers to the purchase of Indian goods made by the company out of the revenue of Bengal government for the purpose of export to England.
2.This acted as one of the sources of initial drain out of the wealth of Bengal in general and India in particular.",Hint 43,1,3,,,
Which of the following  were  the  reasonsof decentralisation at local level by the British government?1.Improvement of civic life of the masses.2.To save additional expenditure on civic improvement out of the existing pool of taxes.3.To help the British in associating with Indians at local level.Select the correct answer using the code given below., 1 only, 2 and 3 only, 1 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3",4,"1.The rising Indian nationalist movement demanded improved civic life in line with improved civic life in Britain. This puts pressure on the British government to implement the same. As, thebritisher thought lower civic amenities would result indicontent amongthemasses which could act as a seed of revolution. (statement 1 is correct)
2.Financial difficulties led the government to further decentralise administration. Thebritish government in India was burdened with the expenditure on railways anddefense. Expenditure on improving civic life would likely to put an additional burden, to avoidit , they decentralised the expenditure by forming local bodies. This helped in easy levying of tax for civic amenities, as it would not hamper the central pool taxes and people would not mind for being taxed for their own improvement.(statement 2 is correct)
3.This also helped the British in associating Indians with the colonial government without hamperingthe its political interest. (statement 3 is correct).",Hint 44,1,1,,,
Consider the following statements regarding the police reforms during the British rule in India :1.Lord Bentick relieved the zamindars from their police functions.2.Lord Cornwallis regularized the police force by establishing a system of thanas under a daroga.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?, 1 only, 2 only, Both 1 and 2, Neither 1 nor 2,2,"1.Statement 1 is not correct. Lord Cornwallis relieved thezamindars of their police duties. Bentick abolished the office of SP. The collector/magistrate was made the head of the police force in his jurisdiction and the commissioner in eachdivison was to act as the SP. this arrangement resulted in a badly organised police force, putting a heavy burden on the collector/magistrate.
2.Statement 2 is correct. Lord Cornwallis organised a regular police force to maintain law and order by going back to and modernising the old Indian system ofthanas (circles) in a district under adaroga (an Indian) and asuperitendent of police (SP) at the head of a district.",Hint 45,1,2,,,
Consider the following statements regarding the reforms brought by Lord William Bentinck:1.He introduced the system of Double Batta.2.He promulgated the Regulation XVII to prohibit the practice of sati.3.The Lord Macaulay committee was appointed by him.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?, 2 only, 2 and 3 only, 1 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3",2,"Statement 1 is incorrect. Lord William Bentinck abolished the system of DoubleBatta.Batta was an allowance to troops on active service.
Statement 2 is correct. Lord William Bentinck was greatly distressed when he received a report of 800 cases of sati in a single year and that from Bengal. He determined to abolish this practice which he considered an offence against natural justice. Therefore, he became a crusader against it and promulgated his Regulation XVII on 4 December 1829 prohibiting the practice of sati. Those who practiced sati were made liable for punishment by law courts as accessories to the crime. The Regulation was extended to the Madras and Bombay Presidencies in 1830.
Statement 3 is correct. The introduction of English Education was a significant event of Lord William Bentincks administration. He appointed a committee headed by Lord Macaulay to make recommendations for the promotion of education. In his report, Macaulay emphasized the promotion of European literature and science through English medium to the people of India. Thisrecommendation was wholeheartedly accepted by William Bentinck. The Government Resolution in 1835 made English the official and literary language of India. In the same year, William Bentinck laid foundation of the Calcutta Medical College.",Hint 46,1,3,,,
Which of the following activities were carried out under Warren Hastings (1772-1785)?1.He brought the dual Government of Bengal to an end.2.He codified the Hindu and Muslim laws.3.He introduced Permanent Settlement in Bengal.4.He established the Diwani and Faujdariadalats at the District level.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?," 1, 3 and 4 only", 1 and 2 only," 1, 2 and 4 only"," 1, 2, 3 and 4",3,All the given activities were carried out under Warren Hasting except the introduction of Permanent settlement in Bengal. The Permanent Settlement (also Permanent Settlement of Bengal)was introduced by Lord Cornwallis in 1793. It was an agreement between the British East India Company and the Landlords of Bengal to settle the Land Revenue to be raised.,Hint 47,1,1,,,
British administration in India was based on1.Civil Service2.Army3.Police4.Landlords5.Judicial OrganizationSelect the correct answer using the codes given below.," 1, 3 and 5 only"," 1, 3, 4 and 5 only", 1 and 5 only," 1, 2 and 3",4,"The British administration in India was based on three pillars: the Civil Service, the Army, and the Police. This was so for two reasons. For one, the chief aim of British-Indian administration was the maintenance of law and order and the perpetuation of British rule.",Hint 48,1,2,,,
What was/were the motives of British education in India?1.It was manifestly too costly and impossible to import enough Englishmen for the purpose.2.Educated Indians would help to expand the market for British manufacturers in India.Select the correct answer using the codes given below., 1 only, 2 only, Both 1 and 2, Neither 1 nor 2,3,"The reasons behind the spreading of modern education in India by the British were:
a) It was manifestly too costly and perhaps not even possible to import enough Englishmen for the purpose. This emphasis on a cheap supply of clerks explains why the schools and colleges had to impart modern education, which lilted its recipients for their jobs in the westernised administration of the Company.
b) English was the language of the masters as well as the language of the administration.
c) Another motive behind the educational policy of the British sprang from the belief that educated Indians would help expand the market for British manufactures in India.
d) Western education was expected to reconcile the people of India to British rub particularly as it glorified the Britishconquerors of India and their administration.",Hint 49,1,3,,,
Which of the following pairs are matched correctly?TreatiesDuring the War1.Treatyof ParisA. Battle of Wandiwash2.Treatyof BasseinB. 1stAnglo-Maratha War (1775-1782)3.Treatyof SalbaiC. 2ndAnglo-Maratha War (1803-1805)Select the correct answer using the codes given below., 1 only, 1 and 3 only, 2 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3 ",1,"The Battle ofWandiwash was a decisive battle in India during the Seven Years War. The Count deLallys army, burdened by a lack of naval support and funds, attempted to regain the fort atVandavasi (now in Tamil Nadu). He was attacked by Sir EyreCootes forces and decisively defeated. The French general Marquis deBussy-Castelnau and the French were then restricted toPondichéry, where they surrendered on 16 January 1761.Wandiwash is the Anglicised pronunciation ofVandavasi.
The Treaty ofSalbai, was signed on 17 May 1782, and was ratified by Hastings in June 1782 and by NanaPhadnavis in February 1783. The treaty ended the First Anglo-
Maratha War. (Salbai is located 32 km south-east to Gwalior city in Gwalior district, MP)
After the fall of Mysore in 1799-1800, the Marathas were the only major power left outside British control in India. The Maratha Empire at that time consisted of a confederacy of five major chiefs: thePeshwa at Poona,Gaekwad of Baroda,Scindia of Gwalior,Holkar of Indore, andBhonsale of Nagpur. The Maratha chiefs were engaged in internal quarrels among themselves. Wellesley had repeatedly offered a subsidiary treaty to thePeshwa andScindia but NanaFadnavis refused strongly. However, in 1802 whenHolkar defeated the combined armies ofPeshwa andScindia,PeshwaBaji Rao II signed the Subsidiary treaty atBassein in 1802.",Hint 50,1,1,,,
"By signing the Subsidiary Alliance, Indian states virtually lost control over most of their rights. Which among the following can best represent the status of Indian states under Subsidiary Alliance?1.Loss of control over sovereignty in external and internal matters.2.Limited rights in defence and foreign relations.3.The Indian rulers became insolvent because of exploitation and heavy maintenance of British army.Select the correct answer using the codes given below.", 1 and 2 only, 2 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3", None ,4,"As a result of subsidiary alliance, Indian rulers lost control over the defence and foreign relations. Since, statement 2 is wrong the correct option to select would be (d) i.e.None
The main principles of a subsidiary alliance were:
a) An Indian ruler entering into a subsidiary alliance with the British had to accept British forces within his territory and also agreed to pay for their maintenance.
b) The ruler would accept a British Resident in his state.
c) An Indian ruler who entered into a subsidiary alliance would not enter into any further alliance with any other power, norwould he declare war against any power without the permission of the British.
d) The ruler would not employ any Europeans other than the British, and if he were already doing so, he would dismiss them.
e) In case of a conflict with any other state, he would agree the resolution decided upon by the British.
f) The ruler would acknowledge the East India Company as the paramount power in India. In return for the ruler accepting its conditions, the Company undertook to protect the state from external dangers and internal disorders.
g) If the Indian rulers failed to make the payments required by the alliance, then part of their territory was to be taken away as a penalty.",Hint 51,1,2,,,
-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,,,-
Which of the following were the features of Indian economy in 18th Century?1.Stagnant agriculture2.Self-sufficient villages3.Closed economySelect the correct answer using codes given below.," 1, 2 and 3", 1 and 3 Only, 2 and 3 Only, 1 and 2 Only,4-C,Indian Agriculture during 18th century was technically backward and stagnant as techniques of production remained stationary for centuries. Also Indian villages were largely self-sufficient. It was not a closed economy as it traded with other countries of Europe and Asia,Hint 51,1,3,,,
The Ancient Monuments Act passed in British era made it obligatory on the part of the Government & local authorities to preserve the monuments of archaeological importance and their destruction an offence. Which British Viceroy was responsible for the Act?, Lord Ripon, Lord Wellesley, Lord Cornwallis, Lord Curzon,4-C,"During the times of Lord Curzon, the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act of 1904 was passed. This act made any injury to the protected monuments an offence punishable under the law. This act also established theArcheological Department which was to collect the historical documents and importance, conduct excavations and bring the ancient historical information into light.",Hint 52,1,1,,,
Which of the following pairs is/are correctly matched?State in 18th centuryState founder1.Mysore:Hyder ali2.Bengal:Aliwardi Khan3.Awadh:Sadat KhanSelect the correct answer using the code given below.," 1, 2 and 3", 1 and 3 only, 1 and 2 only, 3 only,4-C,"Pair 1 is incorrect -Hyderali is not the founder of Mysore state. He took the control of Mysore state fromWodeyars. Pair 2 is Incorrect -Murshid -Quli- Khan founded the state of Bengal.
Pair 3 is correct - Sadat Khan also known by Burhan-Ul-Mulk founded state ofAwadh.",Hint 53,1,2,,,
Which of the following acts made provisions to grant permission to the Christian Missionaries for the propagation of religion in India?, Charter Act of 1833, Charter Act of 1853, Pitts India Act of 1784, Charter Act of 1813 ,4-C,The charter act of 1813 made provisions to grant permission to the persons who wished to go to India for promoting moral and religious improvements. (Christian Missionaries).,Hint 54,1,3,,,
Which of the following is/are the outcomes of war between British India and Nepal in 1814 ?1.Nepal abandoned its claim on Sikkim areas.2.The Gurkhas became part of Indian army.Select the correct answer using the code given below:, Both 1 and 2, Neither 1 nor 2, 1 only, 2 only,1-C,"Statement 1 iscorrect , Nepal withdrew from Sikkim after the 1814 war.
Statement 2 is correct, Gurkhas being the local populace of the hilly region ofhimalayas, added strength to the British Army by being part of it.",Hint 55,1,1,,,
Which of the following events supported the establishment of powerful kingdom in Punjab at the end of the 18th century?1.The invasion of Nadir shah and Ahamad shah Abdali.2.The weakening of Mughal Empire.3.The defeat of marathas in the 3rd battle of Panipat.Select the correct answer using the code given below., 1 and 2 only, 2 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3", 1 only,3-C,"Statement 1 is correct. The invasion of Nadir shah &Ahamad shahAbdali and the consequent dislocation of Punjab administration gave the Sikh an opportunity to rise at the end of 18th century. They filled the
political vacuum after thewithdrawl ofAbdali.
Statement 2 is correct. Due to continuous invasions of Nadir shah &Ahamad shahAbdali and the attacksby Marathas, the Mughal Empire had weakened at the end of 18th century.
Statement 3 is correct. Marathas were defeated in the Battle of Panipat at the hands ofAhamad ShahAbdali. Thus there was powervaccum in the Punjab & this condition was brilliantly utilised byRanjit Singh to establish his kingdom.",Hint 56,1,2,,,
"With reference to Nadir shahs invasion during Mughal period, consider the following statements:1.Nadir Shahs invasion and plunder of Delhi paved way for Marathas and foreign trading companies to Delhi.2.He invaded Delhi during the reign on Muhammad Shah.3.He carried away the famous Koh-I-Noor diamond and Peacock throne of Shahjahan.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?", 1 and 2 only, 2 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3", 1 only,3-C,"Statement 1 is correct. It was Nadir Shah who exposed the weakness of Mughal empire to others andmade it vulnerable to attacks and capture. Thus paved way for Marathas and foreign trading companies to Delhi.
Statement 2 is correct. Nadir Shah invaded Delhi in 1739 at that time Muhammad Shah was the Mughal Statement 3 is correct: He carried away with him famous Peacock throne andKoh-I-Noor toIran.",Hint 57,1,3,,,
Which of the following factors led to emergence of Permanent Settlement in Bengal?1.Need for stability in revenue collection.2.Expectation that it would lead to investment in land by zamindars.3.Need for political allies in form of zamindars.Select the correct answer using the code given below., 3 only," 1, 2 and 3", 1 and 2 only, 1 and 3 only,2-C,"Statement 1 is correct. The predominant motive for Permanent settlement was that of financial security. Before 1793, the company was troubled by fluctuations in its chief source of income, the land revenue. The Permanent settlement guaranteed stability of income.
Statement 2 is correct. It was also expected thatzamaindars would invest in land as the share of government is fixed and any improvement in productivity would accrue tozamindar.
Statement 3 is correct. The British saw a large number of popular revolts in the last quarter of the eighteenth century. So the brought into existence a wealthy and privileged class of zamindars whichowed its existence to British rule and which would therefore be compelled by its own basic interests to support it.",Hint 58,1,1,,,
"Which of the following was/were the reasons for the ruins of Indian Handicraft industry under British rule?1.Disappearance of princes, chieftains, and zamindars as their patrons.2.Levy of discriminatory tariffs against British goods in India.3.Promotion of RailwaysSelect the correct answer using the code given below.", 1 only, 2 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3", 1 and 3 only,4-C,"Statement 1 is correct reason. Princes, chieftains, and zamindars were traditional patrons and buyers of handicrafts. Their disappearance or loss of power meant loss of market for Indian handicraft industry. Statement 2 is incorrect reason. There were no discriminatory tariffs against British goods in India. In fact, Indian goods were discriminated against in Britain.
Statement 3 is correct reason. The ruin of Indian industries, particularly rural artisan industries proceeded even more rapidly once the railways were built. The railways enabled British manufactures to reach and uproot the traditional industries in the remotest villages of the country.",Hint 59,1,2,,,
"With reference to Lord Wellesley, consider the following statements:1.He was the first European governor general to use the system of subsidiary alliance in India.2.He concluded the Treaty of Salbai with the Marathas.3.He reformed the administration and introduced the civil services.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?", 1 and 3 only, 2 only, None, 1 and 2 only,3-C,"1.Statement 1 is not correct: Lord Wellesley used the system of Subsidiary Alliance. Under his Subsidiary Alliance system, the ruler of the allying Indian State was compelled to accept the permanent stationing of a British force within his territory and to pay a subsidy for its maintenance. However Wellesley did not introduce the policy of Subsidiary Alliance. Long before him the French Chief Dupleix introduced the policy of lending the European troops in return of a fixed amount of money. The English also adopted the system. Ever since the governorship of Clive, almost every governor applied it, though with little insight. The special achievement of Wellesley was that he developed and elaborated the policy and applied in almost every Indian state.
2.Statement 2 is not correct: The Treaty ofSalbai was concluded with Warren Hastings, after the end of the First Anglo-Maratha war.
3.Statements 3 is not correct: The Civil Service was brought into existence by Lord Cornwallis. Cornwallis, who came to India as Governor- General in 1786, was determined to purify the administration. He therefore enforced the rules against private trade and acceptance of presentsand bribes by officials with strictness. At the same time, he raised the salaries of theCompany?s servants. Cornwallis also laid down that promotion in the Civil Service would be by seniority so that its members would remain independent of outside influence.",Hint 60,1,3,,,
"With reference to the Indian Civil Services ICS) under the British rule, consider thefollowing statements:1.Cornwallis set up a college at Fort William to train the civil servants.2.Satyendra Prasad Sinha was the first Indian to qualify the ICS.3.Aitchison Commission recommended holding simultaneous examinations in India and England to allow more Indians into the civil services posts.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?", 1 and 3 only, 2 only, None," 1, 2 and 3",3-C,"1.All the statements given are not correct.
2.Statement 1 is not correct: LordWellesly set the Fort William College for training of the new recruits in 1800. In 1806Welleslys college was disapproved by the Court of Directors and instead the East India College was set up atHaileybury in England to impart twoyearss training to the recruits.
3.Statement 2 is not correct:SatyendraNath Tagore was the first Indian to qualify the ICS in 1863.
Satyendra Prasad Sinha was the first Indian to join the Viceroys Executive Council following the reforms under 1909 Act which provided for the first time the association of Indians with the executive Councils of the Governors and the Viceroy.
4.Statement 3 is not correct: In 1886, a Public Service Commission was set up by the government of India under the chairmanship of C. U. Aitchison to examine the conditions under which Indians could be appointed to posts ordinarily reserved for the Europeans. It recommended admission of Indians, subject to their fitness, into the Civil Services but did not favour holding of competitive examination simultaneously in India for this purpose.",Hint 61,1,1,,,
"With reference to the administration ofRanjit Singh in Punjab, consider the following statements:1.He built up a powerful and well-equipped army along European lines.2.He made transformative changes in the system of land revenue promulgated earlier by the Mughals.3.His religious policy was conservative in nature.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?", 2 and 3 only, 1 and 3 only," 1, 2 and 3", 1 only,4-C,"1.Statement 1 is correct:Ranjit Singh built up a powerful, disciplined, and -well-equipped army along European lines with the help of European instructors. He set up modern foundries to manufacture cannon at Lahore. It is said that he possessed the second best army in Asia, the first being the army of the English East India Company,
2.Statement 2 is not correct: He did not make any changes in the system of land revenue promulgated earlier by the Mughals. The amount of land revenue was calculated on the basis of 50 per cent of the gross produce.
3.Statement 3 is not correct: He was tolerant and liberal in religious matters. Many of his important ministers and commanders were Muslims and Hindus. The most prominent and trusted of his ministers was FakirAzizuddin, while his Finance Minister was Dewan DinaNath.",Hint 62,1,2,,,
Which of the following was/were introduced in India during the period of Lord Dalhousie?1.The Guarantee system was introduced to attract investors for railways.2.Telegraph was introduced3.Public Works Department was set up.Select the correct answer using the codes given below., 1 and 3 only, 2 only," 1, 2 and 3", 2 and 3 only,3-C,"Statement 1 is correct. Lord Dalhousies contribution in the development of railways is worth commending. In 1853, he penned his Railway Minute formulating the future policy of railways in India. He started the guarantee system by which the railway companies were guaranteed a minimum interest of five percent on their investment. The government retained the right of buying the railway at the end of the period of contract.
Statement 2 is correct. Telegraph was introduced in India during the period of Lord Dalhousie. The use of Telegraph broughtmarvelous changes in communication system. In India, Lord Dalhousies contribution in this respect is commendable. In 1852, OShaughnessy was appointed the Superintendent of Telegraph Department. Main cities of the country viz., Calcutta, Peshawar, Bombay and Madras were telegraphically connected. About 4000 miles long Telegraph lines were laid before the departure of Dalhousie. During the 1857 Revolt, the system of telegraphic communication proved a boon for the English and the military value of Dalhousies creation was much realized at that time.
Statement 3 is correct. Before the period of Dalhousie, the job of the Public Works Department was done by the Military Board.
Dalhousie created a separate Public Works Department and allotted more funds for cutting canals and roads. The Upper Ganges Canal was completed in 1854. Many bridges were constructed. By modernizing the Public Works Department he laid the foundations of the engineering service in India.",Hint 63,1,3,,,
"Consider the following statements: 1.Haider Ali practised religious toleration, his first Dewan and many other officials were Hindus.2.Tipu Sultan was alone among the Indian rulers, who understood the importance of economic strength as the foundation of military strength.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?", Neither 1 nor 2, 1 only, 2 only, Both 1 and 2,3-C,Both the statements are correct.,Hint 64,1,1,,,
