question,option_1,option_2,option_3,option_4,answers,explanation,hint,status,level
Consider the following statements about Non-Banking Financial Company (NBFC):1. It cannot accept demand deposits.2. It does not form part of the payment and settlement system and cannot issue cheques drawn on itself.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"A Non-Banking Financial Company (NBFC) is a company registered under the Companies Act, 1956 engaged in the business of loans and advances, acquisition of shares/stocks/bonds/debentures/securities issued by Government or local authority or other marketable securities of a like nature, leasing, hire- purchase, insurance business, chit business but does not include any institution whose principal business is that of agriculture activity, industrial activity, purchase or sale of any goods (other than securities) or providing any services and sale/purchase/construction of immovable property. A non-banking institution which is a company and has principal business of receiving deposits under any scheme or arrangement in one lump sum or ininstallments by way of contributions or in any other manner, is also a non-banking financial company (Residuary non-banking company).
NBFCs lend and make investments and hence their activities are akin to that of banks; however there are a few differences as given below:
1. NBFC cannot accept demand deposits;
2. NBFCs do not form part of the payment and settlement system and cannot issue cheques drawn on itself; Hence, both the statements are correct.
3. Deposit insurance facility of Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation is not available to depositors of NBFCs, unlike in case of banks.
NBFCs whose asset size is of 500cr or more as per last audited balance sheet are considered as systemically important NBFCs. The rationale for such classification is that the activities of such NBFCs will have a bearing on the financial stability of the overall economy.",Hint 1,1,1
Special Drawing Right (SDR) basket of IMF consists of1. US dollar2. Indian Rupee3. Chinese renminbi4. Japanese yen5. British pound sterlingSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 2, 3, 4 and 5","1, 3, 4 and 5 only","1, 3 and 4 only",2 and 5 only,2,"The SDR is an international reserve asset, created by the IMF in 1969 to supplement its member countries official reserves. As of September 2017, 204.2 billion SDRs (equivalent to about $291 billion) had been created and allocated to members. SDRs can be exchanged for freely usable currencies.
The value of the SDR is based on a basket of five major currencies—the US dollar, the euro, the Chinese renminbi (RMB), the Japanese yen, and the British pound sterling. Hence, option (b) is correct.",Hint 2,1,2
"In the context of banking, currency deposit ratio (cdr) refers to the ratio of",Money held by the bank to that in circulation in the economy.,Currency introduced in the economy to the net change in foreign reserves.,Money deposited by banks with RBI to total reserves held by banks.,Money held by the public in currency to that they hold in bank deposits.,4,"The currency deposit ratio (cdr) is the ratio of money held by the public in currency to that they hold in bank deposits. cdr = CU/DD. If a person gets Re 1 she will put Rs 1/(1 + cdr) in her bank account and keep Rs cdr/(1 + cdr) in cash. It reflects peoples preference for liquidity. It is a purely behavioural parameter which depends, among other things, on the seasonal pattern of expenditure. For example, cdr increases during the festive season as people convert deposits to cash balance for meeting extra expenditure during such periods.",Hint 3,1,3
Which of the following is/are likely to strengthen the corporate bond market in India?1. Allowing banks to issue masala bonds.2. Making government securities more accessible to retail investors.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"The RBI took a number of measures to strengthen the corporate bond market in India. It accepted many of the recommendations of the Khan Committee to boost investor participation and market liquidity in the corporate bond market. The new measures as announced by the RBI include:
Commercial banks are permitted to issue rupee-denominated bonds overseas (masala bonds) for their capital requirements and for financing infrastructure and affordable housing;
Brokers registered with the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) and authorized as market makers in corporate bond market permitted to undertake repo / reverse repo contracts in corporate debt securities. This move will make corporate bonds fungible and thus boost turnover in the secondary market;
Banks allowed to increase the partial credit enhancement they provide for corporate bonds to 50 per cent from 20 per cent. This move will help lower-rated corporates to access the bond market;
Permitting primary dealers to act as market makers for government bonds, to give further boost to government securities by making them more accessible to retail investors; and
To ease access to the foreign exchange market for hedging in over the counter (OTC) and exchange- traded currency derivatives, the RBI has allowed entities exposed to exchange rate risk to undertake hedge transactions with simplified procedures, up to a limit of US$30 million at any given time.",Hint 4,1,1
"Which of the following is/are correct with reference to the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016?1. It separates commercial aspects of insolvency and bankruptcy proceedings from judicial aspects.2. It provides for a Debt Recovery Tribunal (DRT) as the adjudicating authority with jurisdiction over individuals.Select the correct answer using the code given below.",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (Code) was enacted on May 28, 2016. The Code provides a comprehensive, modern and robust insolvency and bankruptcy regime, at par with global standards and even better in some aspects. It separates commercial aspects of insolvency and bankruptcy proceedings from judicial aspects and empowered stakeholders and adjudicating authorities to decide the matters within their domain expeditiously. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
The code provides for the adjudicating authorities, namely, NCLT and DRT for corporates and individuals respectively and their appellate bodies, namely, NCLAT and DRAT. (NCLT is the forum for corporate bankruptcy and DRT is for individual bankruptcy). Hence, statement 2 is correct.",Hint 5,1,2
Which of the following are a part of the aggregate monetary resources in an economy?1. Currency held by the public2. Net time deposits of commercial banks3. Net demand deposits held by commercial banksSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"RBI publishes figures for four alternative measures of money supply, viz. M1, M2, M3 and M4. Here, M3 is defined as aggregate money supply.
1.M1 = CU + DD
2.M3 = M1 + Net time deposits of commercial banks
where, CU is currency (notes plus coins) held by the public and DD is net demand deposits held by commercial banks. The word ?net implies that only deposits of the public held by the banks are to be included in money supply. The interbank deposits, which a commercial bank holds in other commercial banks, are not to be regarded as part of money supply. M3 is the most commonly used measure of money supply. It is also known as aggregate monetary resources.",Hint 6,1,3
Which ofthe following benefits are associated with Masala Bonds?1. Internationalization of Indian Rupee.2. Tapping of a larger number of investors.3. Reduction in borrowing cost for Indian companies.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"Following benefits are associated with Masala Bonds:
Masala Bonds can help Indian companies to diversify their bond portfolio in addition to corporate bonds and ECBs.
Masala Bonds can help Indian companies to cut down cost. If the company issues any bond in India, it carries an interest rate of 7.5%- 9.00% whereas, Masala Bonds outside India is issued below 7.00% interest rate.
Masala Bonds can help the Indian companies to tap a large number of investors as these bonds are issued in the offshore market. Masala Bonds will help in building up foreign investors confidence in Indian economy and currency which will strengthen the foreign investments in the country.
An offshore investor earns better returns by investing in Masala Bonds rather than by investing in his home country, because the bond yield in his/her home country may be very low (for example bond yield in the US is hardly 2% as against minimum assured Masala Bond yield of 5% to 7%). The investor will also potentially benefit if the rupee appreciates at the time of maturity, but may lose if rupee depreciates.
Masala bond will make available more of foreign funds for infrastructural development in India. Masala Bonds will also help enhancing internationalisation of Indian Rupee.",Hint 7,1,1
"With reference to the Treasury Bills (T- bills), consider the following statements:1. They are long-term government bonds with maturity of more than a year.2. Theyareissuedatdiscount and redeemed in face value at maturity.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"Treasury-Bills are government securities that are issued at a discount and redeemed in face value at maturity. The difference is the interest to the investor. These are issued to address short term receipt- expenditure mismatches under the auction program of the Government. These are primarily issued in threetenrs, 91,182 and 364 day. Hence, statement 1 is not correct and statement 2 is correct. Provident funds and banks are the large buyers of T-bills for their statutory need to hold government securities.",Hint 8,1,2
"With reference to the Bank Rate, consider the following statements:1. It is the rate below which commercial banks cannot give loans to its customers.2. A decrease in the bank rate indicates easy money policy by the central bank.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"Statement 1 is not correct: Bank Rate is the rate at which the commercial bank gets loans and advances from the central bank.
Statement 2 is correct: Easy Money Policy is a policy by which Central Bank seeks to make money plentiful and available at low interest rate in market. Decreasing the Bank Rate decreases rate of loans and advances for consumers in market. The rise in the bank rate by the central bank increases the interest rate on loans and advances by commercial banks. This makes the borrowing of money expensive for general public.",Hint 9,1,3
Which of the following most appropriately explains the concept of Wholesale Banking?,Provide payment services and deposit products to small businesses and low- income households.,"Provide liquidity to commercial banks, financial institutions and large corporates.",Provide more than 50% of its net loans to priority sectors.,Merge loss making public sector banks to create a new wholesale bank.,2,"1.The Committee on Comprehensive Financial Services for Small Businesses and Low Income Households was set up by the RBI in September 2013 under the chairmanship ofNachiketMor, an RBI board member. The panel has also recommended the creation of a set of banks called wholesale banks to provide liquidity to other banks and financial institutions creating assets in the so-called priority sectors. Such banks, given that their primary role is to give loans, will only be permitted to accept deposits of more than Rs. 5 crore, the panel said. They too will have a minimum entry capital requirement of Rs. 50 crore.
2.Wholesale banking involves providing banking services to other commercial banks, mortgage brokers, large corporate, mid-size companies, real estate developers, international trading businesses, institutional customers or other corporations. The services which come under the net of wholesale banking involves wholesaling, underwriting, market making, consultancy, mergers and acquisitions, joint ventures, fund management etc. The focus is on high-level clients and high-value transactions.",Hint 10,1,1
"Consider the following statements with regard to depreciation:1. It refers to that portion of the capital goods which goes in maintenance and replacement of existing goods due to wear and tear.2. To obtain net investment in an economy, depreciation is subtracted from the gross investment.3. It takes into account unexpected fall in the market value of the assets due to recession.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,"1, 2 and 3",3 only,1 and 2 only,4,"Statement 1 is correct: Depreciation refers to that portion of the capital goods which goesin maintenance and replacement of existing goods due to wear and tear, accidental damages and expected obsolescence.
Statement 2 is correct: To obtain net investment in an economy, depreciation is subtracted from the gross investment.
Statement 3 is not correct: It does not take in account unexpected and sudden destruction caused due to fall in the market value of the assets due to economic recession, natural calamities like earthquake, floods or fire. Loss value of fixed assets owing to unexpected obsolescence is called capital loss not depreciation.",Hint 11,1,2
Consider the following statements regarding capital and current account of Balance of Payments:1. The current account has a direct effect on the flow of income in a country.2. The capital account influences the volume of assets which a country holds.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"1.The current account deals with payment for currently produced goods and services. It includes also interest earned or paid on claims and also gifts and donations.
2.In other words, current account receipts have the effect of increasing the flow of income in the country. On the other hand, when India imports goods and services from foreign countries and pays them money which would have been used to demand goods and services within the country money flows out to foreign countries.
3.The capital account, on the other hand, deals with capital receipts and payments of debts and claims. The capital account, however, does not have such a direct effect on the level of income; it influences the volume of assets which a countryholds.Hence, both the statements are correct.",Hint 12,1,3
"With reference to the Market Stabilization Scheme (MSS), consider the following statements:1. It allows RBI to infuse liquidity in the market during liquidity shortage.2. RBI issued the MSS bonds in the aftermath of demonetisation.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"1.MSS bonds are special bonds floated on behalf of the government by the RBI for the specific purpose of absorbing the excess liquidity in the system when regular government bonds prove inadequate. These are mostly shorter-tenure bonds, of less than six months maturity. But the tenure differs depending on the requirement. Hence, statement 1 is not correct.
2.When the demonetisation of Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 notes led to a surge in deposits, the Reserve Bank of India asked banks to set aside all deposits received between September 16, 2016 and November 11, 2016 as cash reserve ratio or CRR. Later, the central bank decided to issue market stabilization scheme (MSS) bonds to manage the excess liquidity. Hence, statement 2 is correct.",Hint 13,1,1
Consider the following statements about Participatory Notes:1. It is a derivative instrument issued in foreign jurisdictions against underlying Indian securities.2. RBI and SEBI have a dual control over P-Notes in order to check its volatility.3. The P-Note holder does not enjoy any votingrightsin relation to security/shares referenced by the P-Note.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.A Participatory Note (PN or P-Note) in the Indian context, in essence, is a derivative instrument issued in foreign jurisdictions, by SEBI and a registered Foreign Institutional Investor (FII) or its sub-accounts or one of its associates, against underlying Indian securities. PNs are also known as Overseas Derivative Instruments, Equity Linked Notes, Capped Return Notes, and Participating Return Notes etc.
Hence, statement 1st is correct and statement 2nd is not correct.
2.The underlying Indian security instrument may be equity, debt, derivatives or may even be an index. Further, a basket of securities from different jurisdictions can also be constructed in which a portion of the underlying securities is Indian securities or indices.
3.In 2014, SEBI issued the new Regulations for Foreign Portfolio Investments, P- Notes got formally defined under the tag Offshore Derivative Instrument (ODIs) in Section 2(1)(j) of the said regulation. As per this definition, participatory notes or ODIs are issued by selected foreign portfolio investors which is a broad category also including FIIs. Hence, Regulation excludes certain category of Foreign Portfolio Investors, like individuals, from issuing the PN against securities held by it that are listed or proposed to be listed on any recognized stock exchange in India.
4.The investor in PN does not own the underlying Indian security, which is held by the FII who issues the PN. The PN holder also does not enjoy any voting rights in relation to security/shares referenced by the PN. Hence, statement 3rd is correct.",Hint 14,1,2
"In the context of Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) of the RBI, consider the following statements:1. It is available only to the scheduled commercial banks.2. Banks can borrow amount equal to its Net Demand and Time Liabilities (NDTL).3.
Government securities can be used as collateral for LAF.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"LAF is a facility extended by the Reserve Bank of India to the scheduled commercial banks (excluding RRBs) and primary dealers to avail of liquidity in case of requirement or park excess funds with the RBI in case of excess liquidity on an overnight basis against the collateral of Government securities including State Government securities. Repo or repurchase option is acollaterised lending i.e. banks borrow money from Reserve bank of India to meet short term needs by selling securities to RBI with an agreement to repurchase the same at predetermined rate and date. The rate charged by RBI for this transaction is called the repo rate. Repo operations therefore inject liquidity into the system. Reverse repo operation is when RBI borrows money from banks by lending securities. The interest rate paid by RBI is in this case is called the reverse repo rate. Reverse repo operation therefore absorbs the liquidity in the system. Hence, statement 1 is not correct.
oThrough LAF, banks are permitted to borrow only a certain percentage of its Net Demand and Time Liabilities (NDTL). In case the Bank requires more funds, beyond what is permissible under LAF, it can access another window called Marginal Standing Facility (MSF).
Hence, statement 2 is not correct.
oThe collateral used for repo and reverse repo operations comprise of primarily Government of India securities. In fact, Reverse Repos and Repos can be undertaken in all SLR-eligible transferable Government of India dated Securities/Treasury Bills. Hence, statement 3 is correct.",Hint 15,1,3
Which ofthe following is/are the components of Personal Income?1. Net Interest Payments made by households2. Transfer payments3. Undistributed profits of firmsSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Personal Income is the income actually received by the individuals and households from all sources in the form of factor income and current transfers
2.Personal Income (PI) = National Income (NI) - Undistributed profits - Net interest payments made by households - Corporate tax + Transfer payments to the households from the government and firms.
3.Out of NI, which is earned by the firms and government enterprises, a part of profit is not distributed among the factors of production. This is called Undistributed Profits( UP). We have to deduct UP from NI to arrive at PI, since UP does not accrue to the households. oCorporate Tax, which is imposed on the earnings made by the firms, will also have to be deducted from the NI, since it does not accrue to the households.
4.The households do receive interest payments from private firms or the government on past loans advanced by them. And households may have to pay interests to the firms and the government as well, in case they had borrowed money from either. So we have to deduct the net interests paid by the households to the firms and government.
5.The households receive transfer payments from government and firms (pensions, scholarship, prizes, for example) which have to be added to calculate the Personal Income of the households.",Hint 16,1,1
Which of the following factors may be attributed to sluggish growth of bank credit in recent years?1. Banks not passing on the entire benefit of monetary easing to borrowers.2. Moreattractive interest ratesfor borrowers in the bond market.3. Weak bank balance sheet as well as corporate balance sheet.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"All statements are correct.
The sluggish growth can be attributed to several factors:
incomplete transmission of the monetary policy as banks had not passed on the entire benefit of monetary easing to borrowers. In the past three years, the central bank has reduced the policy rate by 200 basis points, but the weighted average lending rates have fallen by 145 basis points.
problem of twin-balance sheet (weak bank balance sheet as well corporate balance sheet);
more attractive interest rates for borrowers in the bond market and from non-banking financial institutions.",Hint 17,1,2
A derivative is a security with a price derived from one or more underlying assets. These assets can be:1. Stocks2. Bonds3. Currencies4. Interest rates5. Market indicesSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,"2, 3 and 4 only","1, 4 and 5 only","1, 2, 3, 4 and 5",4,"1.A derivative is a security with a price that is dependent upon or derived from one or more underlying assets. The derivative itself is        a contract between two or more parties based upon the asset or assets. Its value is determined by fluctuations in the underlying asset.
The most common underlying assets include stocks, bonds, commodities, currencies, interest rates and market indexes. oDerivatives can either be traded over-the-counter (OTC) or on an exchange. OTC derivatives constitute the greater proportion of
derivatives in existence and are unregulated, whereas derivatives traded on exchanges are standardized. OTC derivatives generally have greater risk for the counterparty than do standardized derivatives.",Hint 18,1,3
"With reference to Nominal Effective Exchange Rate, consider the following statements:1. It is a weighted average rate of exchange of a countrys currency for a basket of multiple foreign currencies.2. It accounts for the inflation rate of the home country relative to the inflation rate of its trading partners.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"1.The nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) is an unadjusted weighted average rate at which one countrys currency exchanges for a basket of multiple foreign currencies. In economics, the NEER is an indicator of a countrys international competitiveness in terms of the foreign exchange (forex) market. Forex traders sometimes refer to the NEER as the trade-weighted currency index.
2.The NEER adjusted to compensate for the inflation rate of the home country relative to the inflation rate of its trading partners results in the real effective exchange rate (REER).",Hint 19,1,1
Which of the following appear as liability on RBI?s balance sheet?1. Foreign Exchange2. Loan to Commercial Banks3. Currency held by Public4. Deposits of Commercial Banks with RBI Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,"1, 3 and 4 only",1 and 3 only,3 and 4 only,4,</span,Hint 20,1,2
"To finance its deficit, government prefers borrowing from public over RBI. What can be the best reason for this?",Rate of interest charged by RBI is higher.,Government has to return the sum to RBI within a fixed period of time.,Public borrowing does not affect the money supply in the market.,It increases the sale of government bonds.,3,"To finance its expenditure, government likes to borrow from public rather than withdraw cash balances or borrow from RBI. The reason is found on the effects of money supply in the country. Borrowing from public has no effect on money supply in the country. When government borrows, money gets transferred from the public to the government. The net effect on total money supply in the country is nil. On the other hand, withdrawals from cash balance held in RBI and borrowing from RBI leads to increase in money supply. This increase in money supply may lead to rise in prices and may create many problems in the economy. As such government will like to use this source only when it is forced to do so when no other option of financing is left.",Hint 21,1,3
"With reference to currency deposit ratio, consider the following statements:1.It is the ratio of money held by the public in currency to that they hold in bank deposits.2.An increase in the deposit rates decreases the money multiplier effect.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"The current deposit ratio is the ratio of money held by the public in currency to that they in bank deposits. It reflects peoples preference for liquidity. An increase in currency deposit ratio leads to a decrease in money multiplier effect.
An increase in deposit rates will induce depositors to deposit more, thereby leading to a decrease in Cash to Aggregate Deposit ratio. This will in turn lead to a rise in Money Multiplier.",Hint 22,1,1
"Consider the following points of differences between a share and a debenture:1.While a share capital is the credit to the company, a debenture is an ownership capital.2.While dividend is paid on shares, interest is paid on debentures.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"The key difference between a share and a debenture is that while share represents part of ownership of a company, debenture acknowledges loan or debt to the company. Thus, a shareholder is a participant in the
profits as well as losses of the company. Dividend is paid on share, which is an appropriation of profits, but a debenture holder is paid interest over the lifetime of the debenture and principal amount at the end of life.",Hint 23,1,2
Which of the following statements is/are correct regarding Monetary Transmission?1.It refers to the process by which a central banks monetary policy decisions are passed on to the financial markets.2.Rising Non Performing Assets (NPAs) and higher returns on small savings schemes may hinder effective monetary transmission.3.Lowering of CRR and SLR requirements may help ensure effective monetary transmission.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"Monetary transmission refers to the process by which a central banks monetary policy decisions are passed on, through financial markets, to businesses and households. Recent rate cuts - in January and March - have been wasted as banks have refused to lower their lending rates even as many of them have tweaked their deposit rates. Despite the cumulative 50 bps reduction in the repo rate in the three months ended 31 March, monetary policy transmission has not trickled down to borrowing and lending rates in the banking system. RBI can cut commercial banks mandatory bond holding, or the so-called statutory liquidity ratio (SLR), currently pegged at 21.5%. Any cut will theoretically allow banks to use more money to give loans to borrowers instead of investing in government bonds. Similarly, banks cash reserve ratio (CRR), or the deposits that commercial banks are required to keep with RBI (on which they do not earn any interest), can also be cut. If its brought down to 3.5% from the current level of 4%, at least Rs.43,000 crore will flow into the system.",Hint 24,1,3
Which of the following are the components of Balance of Payments (BoP)?1.Financial capital transfers2.External loan and investment3.Foreign Institutional Investment4.Issuing of external bonds5.Export and Imports of Goods and ServicesSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 2 and 3 only","2, 3 and 4 only","1, 4 and 5 only","1, 2, 3, 4 and 5",4,"BoP - A statement that summarizes an economys transactions with the rest of the world for a specified time period. The balance of payments, also known as balance of international payments, encompasses all transactions between a countrys residents and its non- residents involving goods, services and income; financial claims on and liabilities to the rest of the world; and transfers such as gifts. The balance of payments classifies these transactions in two accounts - the current account and the capital account. The current account includes transactions in goods, services, investment income and current transfers, while the capital account mainly includes transactions in financial instruments. An economys balance of payments transactions and international investment position (IIP) together constitute its set of international accounts.",Hint 25,1,1
Which of the following measures can be used to reduce inflation?1.Increasing Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR).2.Increasing Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR).3.Reducing fiscal deficit.4.Reducing Reverse Repo Rate.Select the correct answer using the code below.,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 3 only",3 and 4 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",2,"Increasing the CRR and SLR means that banks are required to park GREATER amount of their assets with the Central Bank. This reduces the banks ability to lend to the clients. Thus, overall money supply in the economy reduces.
Reducing the fiscal deficit may signify that consumption expenditure has been reduced by the government. This can also reduce the amount of money in the economy.
Reverse Repo rate effect on inflation: If RBI increases this Reverse Repo rate, it means RBI wants to contraction of credit. When RBI gets loan from banks at high rate of interest, more and more banks will supply to central bank because it is safe and earning is more. Effect of this will on financial market. Supply of money in financial market will decrease. Due to decrease in the supply of credit inthe market, inflation rate will decrease. Some of the most important measures that must be followed to control inflation are: 1. Fiscal Policy: Reducing Fiscal Deficit 2. Monetary Policy: Tightening Credit 3. Supply Management through Imports 4. Incomes Policy: Freezing Wages.",Hint 26,1,2
"In the context of management of liquidity, consider the following pairs:Type of LiquidityIdeal Management1. Short term(volatile):Technique Repo Auctions2.Medium term:Open Market Operations3.Long Term:Cash Reserve RatioWhich of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?",1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"The Repo and OMOs are same except the fact that Repo has an inbuilt clause of repurchase and it is the most frequently used instrument.
OMOs is the sale/purchase of secondary government securities and it is not binding on the banks. These are performed at quarterly intervals.
CRR is a mandatory requirement of the RBI that banks have to maintain a certain portion of their demands and liabilities. This tool is used by the RBI drain/release liquidity in a longer time frame.",Hint 27,1,3
"How does Shadow Banking differ from commercial banking?1.While commercial banks are tightly regulated, shadow banking regulation lacks transparency.2.While commercial banks can create money being depository institutions, shadow banking cannot create money.3.While liabilities of commercial banks are insured, shadow banking liabilities are not insured.4.While commercial banks have access to central bank liquidity in the times of distress, shadow banking does not have such recourse.Select the correct answer using the code given below.",1 only,1 and 2 only,"2, 3 and 4 only","1, 2, 3 and 4",4,"Shadow banking refers to all the non-bank financial intermediaries that provide services similar to those of traditional commercial banks. These institutions operate outside the regular banking system, meaning that they function in an environment of lesser transparency and regulation than those institutions performing the same functions in the mainstream banking arena.
Shadow banks, like conventional banks undertake various intermediation activities akin to banks, but they are fundamentally distinct from commercial banks in various respects. First, unlike commercial banks, which by dint of being depository institutions can create money, shadow banks cannot create money. Second, unlike the banks, which are comprehensively and tightly regulated, the regulation of shadow banks is not that extensive and their business operations lack transparency. Third, while commercial banks, by and large, derive funds through mobilization of public deposits, shadow banks raise funds, by and large, through market-based instruments such as commercial paper, debentures, or other structured credit instruments. Fourth, the liabilities of the shadow banks are not insured, while commercial banks deposits, in general, enjoy Government guarantee to a limited extent. Fifth, in the times of distress, unlike banks, which have direct access to central bank liquidity, shadow banks do not have such recourse.",Hint 28,1,1
Which of the statements given below is/are correct regarding Bear Market?1.It is a market in decline.2.Investors rush to buy stocks instead of selling.3.Unemployment levels may risesSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3,3,"A bear market is one that is in decline. Share prices are continuously dropping, resulting in a downward trend that investors believe will continue in the long run, which, in turn, perpetuates thespiral. During a bear market, the economy will typically slow down and unemployment will rise as companies begin laying off workers. In a bear market, investors rush to sell their stocks before they lose more value.
A bull market refers to a market that is on the rise. It is typified by a sustained increase in market share prices. In such times, investors have faith that the uptrend will continue in the long term. Typically, the countrys economy is strong and employment levels are high. Typically, the countrys economy is strong and employment levels are high.",Hint 29,1,2
High powered money is:,That money which is issued by the authority of the government.,"That money, whose money value exceeds commodity value of money.",Notes and coins held by the people as well as cash reserves of the commercial banks.,That money which is accepted as a medium of exchange because of the trust between the payer and the payee.,3,"High powered money is the sum total of :
(a) currency held by the people
(b) cash reserves of the commercial banks with the RBI.
High powered money serves as the basis of bank money. Which is why high powered money is also called Base Money or Monetary Base. Greater the base, more the
supply of money by the commercial banks. Supply of high powered money is controlled by the RBI.
Fiat Money is that money which is issued by order/authority of the government. It includes all notes and coins which the people in a country are legally bound to accept as a medium of exchange.
Credit Money is that money, whose money value exceeds commodity value of money. Ex metal coins.
Fiduciary Money is that money which is accepted as a medium of exchange because of the trust between the payer and the payee.
Ex. Cheques are fiduciary money as these are accepted as a means of payment on the basis of trust, not on the basis of any order of the government.",Hint 30,1,3
Anchor Banks refer to:,"Public Sector banks that will drive the consolidation process among the state-owned banks.
B) Public Sector banks that are providing most of the infrastructural financing.
C) Pubic Sector Banks that will coordinate banking activities in a district.
d) Public Sector Banks that have been classified as Domestic Systemically Important Banks (D-SIBs).",,,,1,"Anchor banks refer to Public Sector banks that will drive the consolidation process among the state-owned banks. The government will identify six to ten public sector banks by October 31, 2016. Merger between the banks will be based on geographical and technological synergies, human resources and business profile, among others.
There are many banks which will find it difficult to survive without capital infusion from government. If a bank remains weak, then it will lose business. In such a situation, merging with a relatively stronger bank seems to be the only option.",Hint 31,1,1
Consider the following statements:1.Decreasing the reverse-repo rate can be a suggestive monetary policy to combat inflation.2.Purchasing power of money decreases if there is inflation in the market.3.Inflation favours the debtors.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"The RBI manages monetary policy of India. Monetary policy deals with controlling the money supply in the market. It uses repo rate as the instrument to control inflation. In simple terms, Repo rate is the rate at which RBI gives loan (by pledging some securities) to commercial banks, if the repo rate is increased, banks find it difficult to borrow and hence the liquidity is squeezed and inflation is controlled. Reverse Repo is reverse of repo rate - It is the rate at which commercial banks give loan to RBI. Obviously, repo rate will always be higher than reverse repo rate.
Conceptually, increasing repo rate controls inflation and hence it is assumed that decreasing reverse repo rate will decrease inflation, but that is not correct. The reverse repo if decreased means RBI willtaken loan at cheaper rate from commercial banks. It has no linkage to the monetary policy because the money which is available with the commercial bank may not be kept with the RBI as they do not have any advantage. Hence decreasing reverse repo does not squeeze liquidity and combat inflation. (1) is incorrect.
The second statement and third statement are obvious, purchasing power of money decreases if there is inflation in the market as inflation makes things costly. Inflationfavors the debtors as the amount which the debtor actually pays is less due to inflation. Hence statements 2 and 3 are correct.",Hint 32,1,2
The Macro-Vulnerability Index (MVI) is used for calculating the Macro-Economic performance of the Country. Which of the following factors are used to determine MVI?1.Current Account Deficit2.Fiscal Deficit3.Primary Deficit4.Rate of Inflation5.Exchange RateSelect the correct answer from the code given below.,"2, 4 and 5 only","3, 4 and 5 only","1, 2 and 4 only","1, 2, 4 and 5 only",3,"Macroeconomic Vulnerability Index adds together the rate of inflation, current account deficit and fiscal deficit of a country. The Index value can be compared across countries for different time periods to gauge their relative vulnerability.",Hint 33,1,3
Sterilization by RBI is a/an:,Open market operation,Bank rate policy,Deficit financing operation,Change in SLR,1,"By selling the govt. securities, RBI suck out the liquidity from the market and hence sterilizes the economy against adverse external shocks",Hint 34,1,1
"With reference to Marginal Standing Facility (MSF), consider the following statements:1.It does not affect the value of rupee in international market as it is used for overnight transactions.2.The purpose of marginal standing facility is to reduce volatility in the overnight lending rates in the inter-bank market.3.Marginal standing facility is generally kept lower than repo rate.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"Increasing MSF reduces money supply for speculation which in turn strengthens rupee value in international market. Hence, statement 1 is incorrect.
The purpose of marginal standing facility is to reduce volatility in the overnight lending rates in the interbank market and to enable smooth monetary transmission in the economy. Hence, statement 2 is correct. MSF, being a penal rate, is always fixed above the repo rate. The MSF would be the last resort for banks once they exhaust all borrowing options including the liquidity adjustment facility by pledging through government securities, which has lower rate of interest in comparison with the MSF. The MSF would be a penal rate for banks and the banks can borrow funds by pledging government securities within the limits of the statutory liquidity ratio. The scheme has been introduced by RBI with the main aim of reducing volatility in the overnight lending rates in the inter-bank market and to enablesmooth monetary transmission in the financial system. Hence, statement 3 is incorrect.",Hint 35,1,2
"Which of the following are probable benefits of securitization, in which assets are transformed into security?1.For the owner of the asset, it improves the liquidity position as the future receivables are replaced by cash.2.It improves both the efficiency of the financial markets and market liquidity.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"Securitisation is the process of taking an illiquid asset, or group of assets, and through financial engineering, transforming them into a security.
For Originators (owner of the asset)
Securitisation frees up an originators capital by removing the assets from the balance sheet. This way, capital is now available for origination of fresh assets with profitability potential.
It improves the liquidity position of the originator as the future receivables are replaced by cash. Securitisation can be used as a potent tool for re-balancing and re-distributing risks such as credit, market or liquidity risk or risk concentrations on the balance sheet of the originator.
For investors:
It provides another option for diversifying their debt portfolio. Securitisation allows flexibility in structuring the timing of cash flows to ones needs.
For financial markets:
Securitisation provides alternate debt instruments in the financial markets and improves market liquidity.
It widens the markets and allow entry to new players. It enhances return on capital, diversifies financial markets, and serves as an alternate route offunding.
Securitisation diversifies credit markets as it breaks the process of lending and funding into several discrete steps, leading to specialisation and economies of scale.",Hint 36,1,3
"With reference to money markets, consider the following statements:1.Call money refers to borrowing/lending of funds on overnight basis.2.Notice Money refers to borrowing/lending of funds for period exceeding 14 days.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,The money market primarily facilitates lending and borrowing of funds between banks and entities like Primary Dealers (PDs). Banks and PDs borrow and lend overnight or for the short period to meet their short term mismatches in fund positions. This borrowing and lending is on unsecured basis. Call Money is the borrowing or lending of funds for 1day. Where money is borrowed or lend for period between 2 days and 14 days it is known as Notice Money. And Term Money refers to borrowing/lending of funds for period exceeding 14 days.,Hint 37,1,1
Priority sector lending by banks in India constitutes the lending to which of the following sectors?1.Renewable Energy2.Education3.Housing4.Social InfrastructureSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 4 only,"1, 2 and 3 only","2, 3 and 4 only","1, 2, 3 and 4",4,"The priority sectors include those sectors which may not get adequate institutional credit due to social, cultural and economic reasons. The overall objective of priority sector lending program is to ensure that adequate institutional credit flows into some of the vulnerable sectors of the economy, which may not be attractive for the banks from the point of view of profitability. Categories under PSL include: Agriculture;
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises; Export Credit;
Education; Housing;
Social Infrastructure; Renewable Energy;
8. Others
Creation of infrastructure for Healthcare facilities is covered under Social Infrastructure sub-group.",Hint 38,1,2
"With reference to Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (NEER), which among the following statements is/are correct?1.It is the weighted average of bilateral nominal exchange rates of the home currency in terms of foreign currencies.2.NEER coefficient higher than 1 means that the home countrys currency will usually be worth more than an imported currency.3.In India, it is measured by Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation.Select the correct answer using the code given below.",1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"NEER is the weighted average of bilateral nominal exchange rates of the home currency in terms of foreign currencies. The NEER represents the relative value of a home countrys currency compared to the othermajor currencies being traded (U.S. dollar, Japanese yen, euro, etc.). A higher NEER coefficient means that the home countrys currency will usually be worth more than an imported currency, and a lower coefficient means that the home currency will usually be worth less than the imported currency. The NEER also represents the approximate relative price a consumer will pay for an imported good.
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has been constructing five-country and thirty six-country indices of NEER and REER as part of its communication policy and to aid researchers and analysts. Theses indices are published in the Banks monthly Bulletin. The real effective exchange rate (REER) is the weighted average of a countrys currency relative to an index or basket of other major currencies adjusted for the effects of inflation.",Hint 39,1,3
Which among the following World Bank Group organizations was established to promote the growth of the private sector?,International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD),International Finance Corporation (IFC),Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA),International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID),2,"The five constituents of the World Bank Group include: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), International Development Association (IDA), International Finance Corporation (IFC), Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) and International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID). The International Finance Corporation was established in 1956 as an affiliate of the World Bank, but as a separate entity, to promote the growth of the private sector which would Contribute to the economic development of its member countries.
The MIGA promotes FDI by providing political risk insurance and credit enhancement to investors and lenders against lossescaused by non-commercial risks.
The ICSID is an international arbitration institution which facilitates legal dispute resolution and conciliation between international investors.",Hint 40,1,1
"With reference to Green Bonds in India, consider the following statements:1.Green bond is a debt instrument issued for renewable as well as non-renewable energy projects.2.Both public and private sector banks can issue such bonds.3.It is a low-risk bond as repayment is tied to the issuer rather than success of the project.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,3 only,None,2,"Statement 1 is incorrect: A green bond is like any other bond where a debt instrument is issued by an entity for raising funds from investors. The key difference between a green bond and a regular bond is that the issuer publicly states it is raising capital to fund green projects, assets or business activities with an environmental benefit, such as renewable energy, low carbontransport or forestry projects. Statement 2 is correct. Along with public sector, private bank can also issue such bonds. So far four banks Yes bank, Exim Bank, CLP India and IDBI have issued such bonds. Green bonds are issued by multilateral agencies such as the World Bank, corporations, government agencies and municipalities. Institutional investors and pension funds also have appetite for such bonds.
Statement 3 is correct: It inherently carries lower risk than other bonds. In case of a green bond, proceeds are raised for specific green projects, but repayment is tied to the issuer, not the success of the projects. The broad categories of areas where money raised from green bonds may be invested are climate change adaptation; renewable and sustainable energy; clean transportation, sustainable waste and water management and biodiversity conservation.",Hint 41,1,2
"With reference to Small Banks and Payment Banks, consider the following statements:1.While both can accept deposits, Payment Banks cannot issue debit cards.2.While both are required to maintain CRR, Small Banks are also required to maintain SLR and PSL requirements.3.Both have the same initial minimum capital requirement of 100 cr INR.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"All three statements are correct.
Both can accept deposits and issue debit cards. Payment Banks cannot issue credit cards.
The Capital requirement for both the types of banks is Rs. 100 Crore. However, In case of small finance banks, the Minimum initial contribution of the promoter to the paid-up capital is fixed at 40% and they can bring down his holding to 26% in 12 years from commencement. In Payment banks, the promoters should retain 40%stake for the first five years.
Both have to maintain the maintain CRR. Small Banks have to maintain SLR and PSL requirements as well. For payment banks, the question of SLR does not arise, as the assets will almost entirely be SLR securities. Also, there is no question of priority sector lending.",Hint 42,1,3
"With reference to Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) which of the following statements is/are correct?1.CRR is a reserve requirement that requires banks to maintain in the form of gold, cash or government securities with itself.2.When the RBI lowers CRR, it is said to follow an expansionary monetary policy. Select the correct answer from the codes given below.",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"The CRR is the credit reserve ration i.e. the ratio of the total demand and time liability of a bank that it has to keep with the central bank
i.e. RBI in cash at any given point of time. When the RBI lowers CRR, it infuses more liquidity in the market and is said to be following an expansionary monetary policy.",Hint 43,1,1
"With reference to recapitalization of public sector banks, consider the following statements:1.Reduction of Repo Rate.2.Reduction of Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR).3.Infusion of more capital into the banks.Which of the statement(s) given above is/are not correct?",2 only,1 and 3 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,3,Recapitalization is to restore confidence in banking. Government agrees to buy shares or infuse capital into banking sector and this is called recapitalisation. Repo rate changes and SLR changes are measures used by RBI to control the flow of money into the market.,Hint 44,1,2
Consider the following statements regarding Dear Money Policy:1.RBI raises the Bank Rate.2.Commercial banks can get the money at the higher rate of interest.3.RBI starts raising the CRR and sells the securities to Commercial Banks.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",None,3,"Dear Money is when it is expensive to borrow money because of high real interest rates. For example, if bank rates are 10% and inflation is 6%. The effective real interest rate is 4% which is quite high. According to the loanable funds theory, this would require a rate of return on investment to be at least 4% of higher, to make investment worthwhile.
Bank rate is the rate charged by the central bank for lending funds to commercial banks. Bank rates influence lending rates of commercial banks. Higher bank rate will translate to higher lending rates by the banks. In order to curb liquidity, the central bank can resort to raising the bank rate and vice versa.
A situation in which money or loans are verydifficult to obtain in a given country is called as dear money policy for that country this also known as tight money. Here all the three statements are related to dear money policy.",Hint 45,1,3
"According to RBI, Banks are required to classify Special Mention Accounts (SMA) for which of the following reasons?",Categorization for different sectors in Priority Sector Lending.,Capital norms as per Basel III norms.,Early recognition of stressed assets.,None of the above,3,Option C is Correct Answer,Hint 46,1,1
"With reference to Balance of Trade (BoT), consider the following statements:1.India has continued to suffer from an unfavourable BoT since the beginning of planning era without any exception.2.For a favourable BoT, imports were restricted through Licensing of Imports, Tariff restrictions and Quantitative restrictions.3.For favourable BoT exports were promoted through devaluation, tax concession,Convertibility of rupee and EXIM Bank.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,Option B is correct answer,Hint 47,1,2
Which of the following are the components of the Indian money market?1.Treasury bills2.Call Money market3.Commercial Bills4.Repo and Reverse repo markets5.Mutual FundsSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 2, 3 and 4 only","1, 4 and 5 only","2, 3 and 5 only","1, 2, 3, 4 and 5",4,"The India money market is a monetary system that involves the lending and borrowing of short-term funds. India money market has seen exponential growth just after the globalization initiative in 1992. It has been observed that financial institutions do employ money market instruments for financingshort-term monetary requirements of various sectors such as agriculture, finance and manufacturing.
Central bank of the country - the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has always been playing the major role in regulating and controlling
the India money market. The intervention of RBI is varied - curbing crisis situations by reducing the cash reserve ratio (CRR) or infusing more money in the economy. There are eight instruments or components of the Indian money market especially designed tofulfill the short-term fund requirements of the different categories of the individuals, institutions or the firms and companies:
Treasury Bills
Call Money Market Certificate of Deposit Commercial Bills Commercial Papers Mutual Funds
Repo and Reverse Repo Markets Cash Management Bill.",Hint 48,1,3
Which of the following organization has decided to set-up South Asia Regional Training and Technical Assistance Center (SARTTAC) along with India?,World Bank (WB),International Monetary Fund (IMF),Asian Development Bank (ADB),Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB),2,"India and International Monetary Fund (IMF) have decided to set up South Asia Regional Training and Technical Assistance Centre (SARTTC) in New Delhi.
It is expected to become the focal point for planning, coordinating, and implementing the IMFs capacity development activities in the region on a wide range of areas, including macroeconomic and fiscalmanagement, monetary operations, financialsectorregulation and supervision, and macroeconomic statistics.
TheCenter will help address existing trainingneeds and respond to the demand for IMF
training in India, Bangladesh, Bhutan,Maldives, Nepal, and Sri Lanka, whilebringing theregions training volume on par with those of other regions.",Hint 49,1,1
Consider the following statements with reference to Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR):1.CRR is the fraction of the total Net Demand and Time Liabilities maintained by bank with itself in form of cash deposits.2.SLR is the fraction of the total Net Demand and Time Liabilities maintained by bank with RBI in form of specified liquid assets.3.CRR and SLR are part of Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF).Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 and 2 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",None,4,"Statement 1 is not correct. Cash Reserve Ratio refers to the fraction of the total Net Demand and Time Liabilities (NDTL) of a Scheduled Commercial Bank held in India, that it has to maintain as cash deposit with the Reserve Bank of India (RBI).
Statement 2 is not correct. The Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) is a prudential measure under which (as per the Banking Regulations Act 1949) all Scheduled Commercial Banks in India must maintain an amount in one of the following forms as a percentage of their total Demand and Time Liabilities (DTL) / Net DTL (NDTL);
[i]Cash [ii]Gold; or
[iii]Investments in un-encumbered Instruments that include:
(a) Treasury-Bills of the Government of India.
(b) Dated securities including those issued by the Government of India from time to time under the market borrowings programme and the Market Stabilization Scheme (MSS).
(c) State Development Loans (SDLs) issued by State Governments under their market borrowings programme. (d)Other instruments as notified by the RBI.
In contrast to the CRR, under which banks have to maintain cash with the RBI, the SLR requires holding of assets in one of the above three categories by the bank itself.
Statement 3 is not correct. Liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) is a monetary policy tool which allows banks to borrow money through repurchase agreements or repos. LAF is used to aid banks in adjusting the day to day mismatches in liquidity (frictional liquidity deficit/surplus). Both SLR and CRR are not part of Liquidity adjustment facility.",Hint 50,1,2
Which among the following is/are the qualitative tools to control credit creation by RBI?1.Open Market Operations2.Repo Rate3.Margin Requirements4.Credit Rationing PolicySelect the correct answer using the code given below:,1 and 2 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3 only",3 and 4 only,4,"Various methods used by central bank to control creation can be divided into quantitative and qualitative methods. Qualitative methods are:
1.Margin Requirements
2.Regulation of consumer Credit
3.Credit Rationing Policy
4.Direct Action
While quantitative methods include the following:
5.Open Market Operation
6.Repo Rate
7.Variable Reserve Ratio
8.Bank Rate Policy",Hint 51,1,3
Which of the following functions can be performed by a Payment bank?1.Opening current deposit accounts2.Opening Demand deposit accounts3.Accept NRI deposits4.Distribution of insurances.5.Utility bill paymentsSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 3 and 5 only","2, 3, 4 and 5 only","1, 2, 4 and 5 only",4,"Payment banks: Payments banks are banks which offer basic savings, deposit, payment and remittance services to people without access to the formal banking system.
Following functions can be performed by them
1.Opening of demanddeposits:both current and saving. (statement 1 and 2 correct)
2.Distribution of mutualfunds,insurance and pension products. (statement 4 correct)
3.Utility bill payments like electricity bills etc. (statement 5 correct) Functions prohibited for payment banks
4.No NRI deposits (statement 3 incorrect)
5.No issuing of credit cards
6.Cannot undertake NBFCs activities.",Hint 52,1,1
"With reference to Cess, consider the following statements:1.Cess is earmarked for a particular purpose only and cannot be used for any other purpose.2.Proceeds of cess are distributed on the recommendation of Finance Commission.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"1.Statement 1 is correct: Cess is levied only for particular purpose and cannot be used for any other purpose.
2.Statement 2 is incorrect: Unlike regular tax such as personal income tax, excise duty,etc, a cess is different. All the taxes collected by the government usually go into the Consolidated Fund of India (CFI) which can be spent on any legitimate activity. But the collections from a cess are required to be kept outside of the CFI to be spent only on the specific purpose for which it waslevied.If there is an unspent amount, it is simply carried forward for use in the following year. While the Centrehasto mandatorily share the revenue from other taxes with the States, it gets to retain the entireshare in case of acess.Thus, it is not distributed with states so finance commission have no say on cess.",Hint 53,1,2
Which of the following statements is/are correct regarding Currency Deposit Ratio (CDR)?1.It is the ratio of money held by the public in currency to that they hold in bank deposits.2.There will be decrease in CDR during festive season.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"1.The currency deposit ratio (CDR) is the ratio of money held by the public in currency to that they hold in bank deposits.
2.CDR = CU/DD, where CU is currency (notes plus coins) held by public and DD is net demand deposits held by commercial banks. The word net implies that only deposits of the public held by the banks are to be included in the money supply. Theinter bank deposits, which a commercial banks holds in other commercial banks, are not to be regarded as part of money supply.
3.CDR reflects peoples preference for liquidity. It is a purelybehavioral parameter which depends, among other things, on the seasonal pattern of expenditure. CDR increases during the festive season as people convert deposits to cash balance for meeting extra expenditure during such periods.",Hint 54,1,3
Supply curve represents the relationship between product price and quantity of product that a seller is willing and able to supply. Shifting of supply curve rightward would imply which of the following?,Increase in profits,Decrease in profits,Reduction in quantity supplied,Reduction in price of its goods,1,"1.Supply curve of a firm tends to shift rightwards on account of enhanced profitability. Similarly it shifts leftwards when profit is reduced.
2.Technological progress shift the curve rightwards, similarly reduced input cost and reduced unit tax would give the same output.",Hint 55,1,1
The term Escrow account generally refers to:,The money held in a third-party account on behalf of transacting parties.,The bank accounts that could be maintained without or with very low minimum balance.,The bank account on which no restrictions on the number of times deposit in cash/cheque can be made.,The bank accounts for senior citizens and disabled persons.,1,"1.An escrow account in simple terms is a third party account. It is a separate bank account to hold money which belongs to others and where the money parked will be released only under fulfilment of certain conditions of a contract. The term escrow is derived from the French term escroue meaning a scrap of paper or roll of parchment, an indicator of the deed that was held by a third party till a transaction is completed. An escrow account is an arrangement for safeguarding the seller against its buyer from the payment risk for the goods or services sold by the former to thelatter. This is done by removing the control over cash flows from the hands of the buyer to an independent agent. The independent agent,i.e, the holder of the escrow account would ensure that the appropriation of cash flows is as per the agreed terms and conditions between the transacting parties.
2.Escrow account has become the standard in various transactions and business deals. In India escrow account is widely used in public private partnership projects in infrastructure. RBI has also permitted Banks (Authorised Dealer Category I) to open escrow accounts on behalf of Non Resident corporates for acquisition / transfer of shares/ convertible shares of an Indian company.",Hint 56,1,2
"As per the law of demand, with all other factors being constant, the demand of any particular good depends on which of the following factors?1.Price of the good2.Price of other goods3.Consumer preferenceSelect the correct answer from the code given below.",1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"1.The law of demand is a micro-economic law that states, all other factors being equal, as the price of a good or service increases, consumer demand for the good or service will decrease, and vice versa. Hence demand of a good only depends on its own price.",Hint 57,1,3
Money supply refers to the total stock of money held by Public. Which of the following is/are part of the term public in this context?1.Households2.Non-Banking Financial Companies3.Commercial Banks4.Reserves of IMF in Indian currency kept with RBISelect the correct answer using the code given below.,3 and 4 only,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 2 and 4 only","1, 2, 3 and 4",3,"1.The supply of money refers to the total stock of money held by the public. The term public includes: Households, firms, local authorities, non-banking financial institutions, non-departmental public sector banks, reserves of foreign banks, governments and IMF, etc. held in Indian rupee held by the RBI. The term excludes suppliers of money such as Central Government, RBI and the Commercial banks.",Hint 58,1,1
Which of the following entities/institution can operate as Banking Correspondents?1.Retired bank employees2.Post- Offices3.NBFC-MFI4.NBFC-ND5.Retired TeachersSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,"2, 3 and 4 only","1, 3 and 5 only","1, 2, 3, 4 and 5",4,"Banking Correspondents (BCs) are individuals/entities engaged by a bank in India (commercial banks, Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) and Local Area Banks (LABs)) for providing banking services in unbanked/under-banked geographical territories. A banking correspondent works as an agent of the bank and substitutes for the brick and mortar branch of the bank.
Recently, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) permitted banks to appoint non-banking finance companies (NBFCs) which do not accept deposits as their business correspondents (BCs), a move to extend banking services to remote areas.
Entities eligible to be appointed as BC are:
1.NGOs/ MFIs set up under Indian Societies/ Trust Acts.
2.Societies registered under mutually aided co-operative societies (MACs) Act or the Cooperative Acts of States.
3.Section 25 companies.
4.Post Offices.
5.Retired Bank employees
6.Ex-Service men.
7.Retired Govt. Employees.
8.Individualkirana/ medical/fair price shop owners.
9.Individual Public Call Office (PCO) operators.
10.Agents of small savings schemes of Government of India/ Insurance Companies.
11.Individual who own petrol pumps.
12.Retired teachers.
13.Authorized functionaries ofwell run Self Help Groups (SHGs) linked to banks.
14.Individual member ofFarmerÂs Clubs.
15.Individual operators of Rural Multipurpose kiosks/ Village Knowledge Centres
16.Individuals/ proprietors/ owners who manageAgri Clinics/Agri Business Centres.
17.Retired Post Masters.
18.Individuals such as auto dealers, tractor dealers and FMCG stockists.
19.Insurance agents including of private insurance companies (IRDA certified) and postal agents.
20.Individuals operating Common Services Centres (CSCs) established by Service Centre Agencies (SCAs) under the National e- Governance Plan (NeGP).
21.For profit companies
22.Any other individual considered suitable by the selection committee.",Hint 59,1,2
Which among the following is/are included in the Priority sectors for lending by commercial banks?1. Housing2. Education3. Export Credit4. Renewable EnergySelect the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 2 and 4 only",1 and 3 only,2 and 4 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",4,"Categories under priority sector are:
1.Agriculture
2.Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
3.Export Credit
4.Education
5.Housing
6.Social Infrastructure
7.Renewable Energy",Hint 60,1,3
Which of the following schemes do not constitute a Collective Investment Scheme (CIS)1.Co-operative Society2.Non- Banking Financial Companies3.Insurance Companies4.Chit BusinessSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 3 and 4 only","1, 2, 3 and 4",4,"Any scheme or arrangement made or offered by any company under which the contributions, or payments made by the investors, are pooled and utilised with a view to receive profits, income, produce or property, and is managed on behalf of the investors is a Collective Investment Scheme (CIS). Investors will not have day to day control over the management and operation of such scheme or arrangement. The following schemes do not constitute a collective investment scheme:
1.Any scheme or arrangement made or offered by a co-operative society or a society being a society registered or deemed to be registered under any law relating to co-operative societies for the time being in force in any State
2.Any scheme or arrangement under which deposits are accepted by non-banking financial companies
3.Any scheme or arrangement being a contract of insurance to which the Insurance Act, applies
4.Any scheme or arrangement providing for any Scheme, Pension Scheme or the Insurance Scheme framed under the Employees Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952
5.Any scheme or arrangement under which deposits are accepted under section 58A of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)
6.Any scheme or arrangement under which deposits are accepted by a company declared as a Nidhi or a mutual benefit society under section 620A of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)
7.Any scheme or arrangement falling within the meaning of Chit business as defined in clause (d) of section 2 of the Chit Fund Act, 1982 (40 of 1982)
8.Any scheme or arrangement under which contributions made are in the nature of subscription to a mutual fund",Hint 61,1,1
Which of the following problems is/are associated with the barter system of exchange?1.It requires the double coincidence of wants.2.It is difficult to use in large economies.3.It is difficult to carry forward perishable wealth under barter system.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Statement 1 is correct. The first difficulty in barter is to find two persons whose disposable possessions mutually suit each others wants. This is known as the problem of double coincidence of wants.
2.Statement 2 is correct. It is difficult to use in large economies as people have to incur huge costs in searching for suitable person to exchange their surpluses.
3.Statement 3 is correct. It is difficult to carry forward the perishable wealth under barter system. For example the commodity that a person wants to exchange may be perishable such as food grains.",Hint 62,1,2
The Reserve Bank of India performs which of the following functions?1.Regulation and supervision of the non-banking financial institutions.2.Management of foreign exchange reserves3.Banker to banks4.Banker to the Central and State GovernmentsSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 2 and 4 only",3 and 4 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",4,"The functions of the Reserve Bank of India can be categorised as follows:
1.Monetary policy
2.Regulation and supervision of the banking and non-banking financial institutions, including credit information companies
3.Regulation of money, forex and government securities markets as also certain financial derivatives
4.Debt and cash management for Central and State Governments
5.Management of foreign exchange reserves
6.Foreign exchange management-current and capital account management
7.Banker to banks
8.Banker to the Central and State Governments
9.Oversight of the payment and settlement systems
10.Currency management",Hint 63,1,3
"With reference to Repo rate, consider the following statements:1.It is the rate at which the RBI borrows money from commercial banks.2.Both government securities and corporate bonds can be used for transactions under Repo rate.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"1.Statement 1 is incorrect. Repo rate is the rate at which the central bank of a country (Reserve Bank of India in case of India) lends money to commercial banks in the event of any shortfall of funds. Repo rate is used by monetary authorities to control inflation.
2.Reverse repo rate is the rate at which the central bank of a country (Reserve Bank of India in case of India) borrows money from commercial banks within the country.
3.Statement 2 is correct. The securities transacted here can be either government securities or corporate securities or any other securities which the Central bank permits for transaction. Non-sovereign securities are used in many global markets for repo operations. Unlike them, Indian repo market predominantly uses sovereign securities, though repo is allowed on corporate bonds and debentures.",Hint 64,1,1
"In the context of economy, sterilization by RBI refers to:",Operations by RBI to neutralize effects of excess inflow of foreign investments in the economy.,Operations by RBI to neutralize the effects of high non-performing assets on the economy.,Operations by the RBI to neutralize the effects of high fiscal deficit on the economy.,None of the above,1,"Sterilization refers to the process by which the RBI takes away money from the banking system to neutralise the fresh money that enters the system. By selling the government securities, RBI suck out the liquidity from the market and hence sterilizes the economy against adverse external shocks.",Hint 65,1,2
"With reference to Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR), consider the following statements:1.It is the ratio of banks capital to its risk-weighted credit exposure (loans).2.A bank with lower CAR is considered safe.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"1.Statement 1 is correct. Capital Adequacy Ratio is the measure of a banks financial strength expressed by the ratio of its capital (net worth and subordinated debt) to its risk-weighted credit exposure (loans). It is also called CRAR-Capital to Risk-weighted Assets Ratio.
2.Statement 2 is incorrect. A bank with a higher capital adequacy is considered safer because if its loans go bad, it can make up for it from its net worth. Most banks in India have a capital adequacy of more than 12 %.",Hint 66,1,3
Which of the following is/are correct regarding the High Powered Money?1.It is the total liability of the central monetary authority of the country.2.It includes deposits of the Government and commercial banks with central monetary authority.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"1.High Powered Money: The total liability of the monetary authority of the country, RBI, is called the monetary base or high powered money. It consists of currency (notes and coins in circulation with the public and vault cash of commercial banks) and deposits held by the Government of India and commercial banks with RBI.",Hint 67,1,1
In an economy a situation of liquidity trap is Characterised by which of the following?1.Low savings rate2.High demand for bonds3.Expansionary monetary policySelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Liquidity trap is a situation when expansionary monetary policy (increase in money supply) does not increase the interest rate, income and hence does not stimulate economic growth.
2.It is the situation in which prevailing interest rates are low and savings rates are high, making monetary policy ineffective.
3.In a liquidity trap, consumers choose to avoid bonds and keep their funds in savings, because of the prevailing belief that interest rates will soon rise. Because bonds have an inverse relationship to interest rates, many consumers do not want to hold an asset with a price that is expected to decline.",Hint 68,1,2
Which one of the following statement regarding Factor of Production is correct?,It is the input that a firm uses in the production process.,It is the output which is produced in the production process.,It is the additional input that is required to achieve the maximum output.,It is the ratio of the output to that of the input of the production process.,1,"The inputs that a firm uses in the production process are called factors of production. In order to produce output, a firm may require any number of different inputs.",Hint 69,1,3
Which of the following banks can be classified as universal banks?1.Small Finance banks2.Payment banks3.Non- Banking Financial companies. Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 3",None,4,"1.Universal Banking means that Financial Institutions (FIs) and Banks are allowed to undertake umbrella activities of commercial banking, investing and other related businesses like developmental banking, merchant banking etc.
2.Small Finance Bank: Banks with a small finance bank license can provide basic banking service of acceptance of deposits and lending. The aim behind these is to provide financial inclusion to sections of the economy not being served by other banks, such as small business units, small and marginal farmers, micro and small industries and unorganized sector entities. They can sell financial instruments like insurance, pensions, mutual funds etc. but only after prior approval of RBI. These banks are barred from taking any activity of commercial investments with high risks. Hence, they are not included in Universal banking system.
3.Payment banks: Payments banks offer basic savings, deposit, payment and remittance services to people without access to the formal banking system. They could not come under the purview of universal bank as they can offer limited financial services.
4.NBFCs are registered under companies act, they cannot issue insurance and bonds. Hence, could not become Universal banks until, unless upgraded into schedule banks.",Hint 70,1,1
"Consider the following differences between Marginal Cost of Funds based Lending Rate(MCLR) and Base Rate:1.Unlike base rate calculation, Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) cost is considered in the calculation of MLCR.2.Unlike base rate calculation, Repo rate is mandatory in the calculation of MCLR. Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"The concept of marginal is important to understand Marginal Cost of Funds based Lending Rate (MCLR). In economics sense, marginal means the additional or changed situation. While calculating the lending rate, banks have to consider the changed cost conditions or the marginal cost conditions.
1.Statement 1 is incorrect. The CRR costs and operating cost (is the operating expenses incurred by the banks) are the common factors for both base rate and the MCLR.
2.Statement 2 is correct. The MCLR should be revised monthly by considering some new factors including the repo rate and other borrowing rates. Specifically the repo rate and other borrowing rate that were not explicitly considered under the base rate system.
3.Under MCLR:
Costs that the bank is incurring to get funds (means deposit) is calculated on a marginal basis The marginal costs include Repo rate; whereas this was not included under the base rate.
Many other interest rates usually incurred by banks when mobilizing funds also to be carefully considered by banks when calculating the costs.
The MCLR should be revised monthly.",Hint 71,1,2
"With reference to marginal standing facility, consider the following statements:1.It allows banks to borrow money from the RBI over and above what is available to them through the Liquidity Adjustment Facility.2.It is a penal rate and is always kept above repo rate.3.Under it, banks can avail funds only by pledging government securities.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 3 only,1 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) refers to the penal rate at which banks can borrow money from the central bank over and above what is available to them through the LAF window.
2.MSF, being a penal rate, is always fixed above the repo rate. The MSF would be the last resort for banks once they exhaust all borrowing options including the liquidity adjustment facility by pledging government securities, where the rates are lower in comparison with the MSF.
3.The MSF would be a penal rate for banks and the banks can borrow funds by pledging government securities within the limits of the statutory liquidity ratio. The scheme has been introduced by RBI with the main aim of reducing volatility in the overnight lending rates in the inter-bank market and to enable smooth monetary transmission in the financial system.",Hint 72,1,3
"To finance its deficit, government prefers borrowing from public over RBI. The main reason is",Rate of interest charged by RBI is higher.,Government has to return the sum to RBI within a fixed period of time.,Public borrowing does not affect the money supply in the market.,This increases the sale of government bonds.,3,"1.To finance its expenditure, government likes to borrow from public rather than withdraw cash balances or borrow from RBI. The reason is found on the effects of money supply in the country. Borrowing from public has no effect on money supply in the country. When government borrows, money gets transferred from the public to the government. The net effect on total money supply in the country is nil.
2.On the other hand, withdrawals from cash balance held in RBI and borrowing from RBI leads to increase in money supply. This increase in money supply may lead to rise in prices and may create many problems in the economy. As such government will like to use this source only when it is forced to do so when no other option of financing is left.",Hint 73,1,1
"With reference to Participatory Notes (PN), consider the following statements:1.These are financial instruments used by investors that are not registered with the SEBI to invest in Indian securities.2.The investors enjoy the voting rights in relation to shares invested through the PN.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"1.Statement 1 is correct. Participatory notes, also referred to as P-notes, are financial instruments used by investors or hedge funds that are not registered with the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) to invest in Indian securities.
2.Statement 2 is incorrect. The investor in PN does not own the underlying Indian security, which is held by the FII who issues the PN. Thus the investors in PNs derive the economic benefits of investing in the security without actually holding it. They benefit from fluctuations in the price of the underlying security since the value of the PN is linked with the value of the underlying Indian security. The PN holder also does not enjoy any voting rights in relation to security/shares referenced by the PN.",Hint 74,1,2
Which among the following is/are the instruments of secondary capital market?1.Bonds2.Initial Public Offering3.Commercial PapersSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 3 only,1 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"Secondary Market refers to a market where securities are traded after being initially offered to the public in the primary market and/or listed on the Stock Exchange. Majority of the trading is done in the secondary market.
Secondary market comprises of equity markets and the debt markets. Following are the main financial products/instruments dealt in the secondary market:
Equity: The ownership interest in a company of holders of its common and preferred stock. The various kinds of equity shares are as follows:
1.Equity Share
2.Rights Issue / Rights Shareso Bonus Shares
3.Preferred Stock / Preference shareso Security Receipts
4. Government securities (G-Secs) o Debentures
5. Bond
Initial Public Offering (IPO) is an offering of the primary market where a private company decides to sell stocks to the public for the first time.",Hint 75,1,3
"With reference to Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF), consider the following statements:1.The shortfalls in the priority sector lending of both foreign banks and public sector banks are deposited in RIDF.2.It is maintained by the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD).Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"1.Statement 1 is not correct. Domestic commercial banks both Public and Private contribute to the RIDF to the extent of their shortfall in stipulated priority sector lending to agriculture. The main objective of the Fund is to provide loans to State Governments and State-owned corporations to enable them to complete ongoing rural infrastructure projects. The foreign banks having shortfall in lending to stipulated priority sector target/sub-targets are required to contribute to Small Enterprises Development Fund (SEDF) to be set up by Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI).
2.Statement 2 is correct. The RIDF was set up by the Government in 1995-96 for financing ongoing rural Infrastructure projects. The fund is maintained by the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD).",Hint 76,1,1
"Consider the following points of differences between a share and a debenture:1.While a share capital is the credit to the company, a debenture is an ownership capital.2.While dividend is paid on shares, interest is paid on debentures.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"1.The key difference between a share and a debenture is that while share represents part of ownership of a company, debenture acknowledges loan or debt to the company. Thus, a shareholder is a participant in
the profits as well as losses of the company.
2.Dividend is paid on share, which is an appropriation of profits, but a debenture holder is paid interest over the lifetime of the debenture and principal amount at the end of life.",Hint 77,1,2
"With reference to money markets, consider the following statements:1.Call money refers to borrowing/lending of funds on overnight basis.2.Notice Money refers to borrowing/lending of funds for period exceeding 14 days.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"1.The money market primarily facilitates lending and borrowing of funds between banks and entities like Primary Dealers (PDs). Banks and PDs borrow and lend overnight or for the short period to meet their short term mismatches in fund positions. This borrowing and lending is on unsecured basis. Call Money is the borrowing or lending of funds for 1 day, whereas money borrowed or lend for period between 2 days and 14 days is known as Notice Money. And Term Money refers to borrowing/lending of funds for period exceeding 14 days.",Hint 78,1,3
"With reference to Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT), consider the following statements:1.Under DBT, the monetary benefits from different schemes will be directly transferred to the beneficiarys bank account.2.It will help to eliminate waste in subsidy transfer and reduce corruption.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"1.Statement 1 is correct. Under the Direct Benefits Transfer or DBT, the entitled benefit from several schemes of the central government in the form of subsidy, stipend, scholarship or other monetary benefits is directly transferred to the beneficiarys bank account which will eventually be linked to an
Aadhaar number. The scheme has been rolled out presently for even the beneficiaries who do not have anAadhaar number. 2.Statement 2 is correct. DBT aims to target the beneficiaries accurately and reduce corruption. It will eliminate waste in subsidy transfer.",Hint 79,1,1
Consider the following  statements  with regard  to  Pension  Fund  Regulatory  andDevelopment authority (PFRDA):1.It is a non-statutory body under the ministry of Social Justice.2.Pension funds of both private and Government employee comes under its purview.3.The National Pension Scheme (NPS) is regulated by PFRDA.Which of the following statements given above are correct,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"PFRDA is a pension regulatory body established by the government of India IN 2003 and granted statutory status through Pension Fund Regulatory & Development Authority Act in 2013. It is a statutory body and is autonomous as it does not under ambit of any ministry.
Hence statement 1 is incorrect.
oIt regulates and oversees pension funds of both government and private sector employees including employees of unorganized sector. It regulates the National Pension Scheme. Hence statements 2 and 3 are correct.",Hint 80,1,2
Which of the following is/are the components of Current Account of the Balance of Payments?1.Investments of Indian nationals in other countries.2.Dividends from Foreign Investment3.Loans from World BankSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.Under current account of theBoP, transactions are classified into merchandise (exports and imports) and invisibles.
2.Invisible transactions are further classified into three categories, namely (a) Services-travel, transportation, insurance, Government not included elsewhere (GNIE) and miscellaneous (such as,
communication, construction, financial, software, news agency, royalties, management and business services); (b) Income; and (c) Transfers (grants, gifts, remittances,ets.) which do not have any quid pro quo.
3.Loans from world bank and the investment by Indian nationals abroad are part of the capital account of the Balance of Payments.",Hint 81,1,3
Which of the following is/are part of transfer payments?1.Payment for Services provided abroad2.Donations from abroad3.RemittanceSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 only,2 and 3 only,4,"1.Transfer payments are receipts which the residents of a country receive  for free, without having to make any present or future payments in return. They consist of remittances, gifts and grants. They could be official or private. The payment for the service provided abroad is not part of transfer payments.",Hint 82,1,1
"With reference to rural credit in India, consider the following statements:1.The share of non-institutional credit is greater than the share of institutional credit for farmers in India.2.Among the institutional credit agencies, NABARD is the biggest contributor of direct loan to farmers.3.Ratio of agricultural credit to agricultural GDP has increased in the last decade.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,1 and 2 only,3 only,2 and 3 only,3,"1.Statement 1 is not correct. It was during the first decade after independence (1951-52) that money lenders and others had more than 90
% share in rural credit. Currently their relative share have come
down to almost 40 %. To a large extent, they have been replaced by institutional agencies.
2.Statement 2 is not correct. NABARD does not extend any direct loan to farmers. It extend loans to cooperatives and commercial banks who offer loans to farmers and others in rural areas.
3.Statement 3 is correct. The ratio of agricultural credit to agricultural GDP has increased from 10 per cent in 1999-2000 to around 38 per cent by 2012-13. This fact can also be derived from the fact that increasing efforts are being made at financial inclusion and also government has been continuously increasing the target of agricultural credit in every budget.",Hint 83,1,2
Consider the following statements with regard to Asian Development Bank (ADB):1.It is a regional development bank headquartered in Tokyo.2.The bank admits members from the Asian Continent only.3.It releases annual report of Creativity Productivity Index.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,3 only,1 and 3 only,3,"1.Asian Development Bank (ADB) is a regional development bank headquartered in Manila (Philippines). The bank admits members of the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and Pacific
2.Creativity Productivity Index is an annual report released by it.",Hint 84,1,3
"With reference to Bitcoins, consider the following statements:1.The value of the Bitcoins is based on a basket of currencies.2.In India, only the entities approved by the Reserve Bank of India can transact in Bitcoins.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,4,"1.Statement 1 is not correct. This is a virtual currency. There is no underlying or backing of any asset for virtual currency. Its value seems to be depends on speculation.
2.Statement 2 is not correct. Bitcoin is a digital currency that is not tied to a bank or government and allows users to spend money anonymously.",Hint 85,1,1
Qualified Foreign Investors (QFIs) are allowed to invest in which of the following segments of the capital market?1.Mutual Funds2.Equities3.Corporate DebtSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 3 only,2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.The Qualified Foreign Investor (QFI) is sub-category of Foreign Portfolio Investor and refers to any foreign individuals, groups or associations, or resident, however, restricted to those from a country that is a member of Financial Action Task Force (FATF) or a country that is a member of a group which is a member of FATF and a country that is a signatory to International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) Multilateral Memorandum of Understanding (MMOU). The objective of enabling QFIs is to deepen and infuse more foreign funds in the Indian capital market and to reduce market volatility as individuals are considered to be long term investors, as compared to institutional investors. They are allowed to invest in - mutual funds, equities and corporate debt.",Hint 86,1,2
"With reference to the economy, what does the term unicorn club refer to?",It refers to the startups with valuation greater than $1 billion.,It refers to the companies with presence in multiple sectors of economy.,It refers to countries with a growth rate greater than 10 per cent in an year.,None of the above,1,"1.A unicorn club refers to a start-up witha estimated valuation of more than $1 billion. As of December 2015, eight Indianstartups belonged to the Unicorn club.",Hint 87,1,3
"Which of the following is/are the characteristics of Hard currency i.e, currency of a strong geo-political country with stable economy?1.Low liquidity2.Free convertibility3.Full convertibilitySelect the correct answer using the codes given below.",3 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"Currency of a strong geo-political nation is considered as hard currency. Such currencies have the following characteristics:
1.High liquidity: As these currencies are traded throughout the world and have high stability. (statement 1 incorrect)
2.Free convertibility: No fee being charged in converting these currencies intoother(statement 2 correct)
3.Full convertibility: Generally, these currencies are fully convertible for easy trading without any condition attached (statement 3 correct) Currency like US dollar, Euro falls under the category of hard currency.",Hint 88,1,1
Which among the following statements is/are correct about green bonds?1.It is an equity instrument used to raise capital to fund green projects.2.Private corporations cannot issue green bonds.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,4,"1.Green bond is a debt instrument (and not equity instrument) which publicly states that capital is being
raised to fund green projects, that typically include those relating to renewable energy, emission reductions and so on.
2.Green bonds are issued by multilateral agencies such as the World Bank, corporations, government agencies and municipalities.
India has embarked on an ambitious target of building 175 gigawatt of renewable energy capacity by 2022, from just over 30 gigawatt now. This requires a massive $200 billion in funding. This is likely to increase Indias share in green bond market",Hint 89,1,2
"With reference to MUDRA (Micro Units Development and Refinance Agency) Bank, consider the following statements:1.The funding to small entrepreneurs will be disbursed through both banks and non-banking financial institutions (NBFCs).2.The bank will provide more than 50% of the loans to SC/ST entrepreneurs.3.MUDRA Bank is both financier and regulator of Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs).Which of the statements given above is/are true?",1 only,1 and 3 only,2 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"1.PradhanMantri MUDRA (Micro Units Development and Refinance Agency)Yojana or PMMY has been
set up with the intention to fund the unfunded. The new institution aims to provide financial assistance to unfunded small entrepreneurs who provide employment to a large number of people.
2.The purpose of MUDRA is to provide funding to the non-corporate small business sector through various Last Mile Financial Institutions like Banks, NBFCs and MFIs. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
3.The main focus will be on businesses promoted by SC and ST entrepreneurs. However, there is no specific amount that is mentioned for these sections. Hence, statement 2 is incorrect.
4.MUDRA loan is available through Banks/NBFCs/MFIs for activities such as manufacturing, trading and services. Loans are categorised intoShishu,Kishor andTarun. These products have been designed to cater to customers operating at the lower end of the enterprise spectrum.
5.Recently, clarifying its stand on regulation of microfinance companies, the government has said that the Reserve Bank of India would continue to regulate MFIs registered as non-banking finance companies (NBFCs) with the central bank. MFIs will not be regulated by the Micro Units Development and Refinance Agency (MUDRA) Bank, as proposed by the finance ministry earlier. Hence, 3rd statement is not correct.",Hint 90,1,3
Which of the following is/are the components of Capital Account of Balance of Payments?1.Foreign Direct Investment2.Foreign Institutional Investment3.Deposits by NRIsSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 2 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Under the Capital Account, capital inflows can be classified by instrument (debt or equity) and maturity (short orlongterm). 2.The main components of the capital account include foreign investment, loans and banking capital.
3.Foreign investment, comprising Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and Portfolio Investment consisting of Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs) investment, American Depository Receipts/Global Depository
Receipts (ADRs/GDRs) represents non-debt liabilities, while loans (external assistance, external commercial borrowings and trade credit) and banking capital, including non-resident Indian (NRI) deposits are debt liabilities.",Hint 91,1,1
Which of the following can reduce the deficit in Balance of Payments?1.Reducing import custom duties2.Restrictive monetary policy3.Appreciation of domestic currency. Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,2 only,1 and 2 only,3,"Balance of payments summarizes an economys transactions with the rest of the world for a specified time period. To correct deficit inBoP, a country will have to take steps which would:
(a) attract more foreign investment
(b) increase exports and decrease unnecessary imports
1. is not correct as Reducing import duty would lead to increase in imports and hence would lead to more deficit inBoP.
2. is correct as restrictive monetarypolicy(lower money supply) would lead to fall in prices of goods in country which would make exports competitive in international market.
3. is not correct as Appreciation of increase in value of domestic currency would make exports less competitive.",Hint 92,1,2
Which of the following are part of World Bank Group of which India is also a member?1.International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.2.Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency.3.International Development Association.4.International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 3 only,3 and 4 only,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 2 and 4 only",3,"Following 5 institutions are part of the World Bank Group:
1.International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
2.International Development Association
3.International Finance Corporation
4.Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
5.InternationalCenter for the Settlement of Investment Disputes
India is a member of four of the five constituents of the World Bank Group viz., International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), International Development Association (IDA), International Finance Corporation (IFC) and Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA). India is not a member of ICSID (International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes).",Hint 93,1,3
Which of the following is correct with respect to the convertibility of Indian rupee,It is fully convertible on both capital and current account,It is fully convertible on current account and partially on capital account,It is partially convertible on both capital and current account,It is fully convertible on capital account and partially on current account,2,"1.Convertibility of rupee means that those who have foreign exchange (e.g. US dollars, PoundSterlings etc.) can get them converted into rupees and vice-versa at the market determined rate of exchange.
2.In India full convertibility is permitted for current account and partial convertibility for capital account.
3.Convertibility has been partial in capital account to protect the domestic market from flight of foreign investment , as what marred the east Asian countries in 90s .",Hint 94,1,1
"Consider the following statements with respect to Real Exchange Rate:1.It is calculated by adjusting the nominal exchange rate with purchasing power parity between the two countries.2. If the real exchange rate rises above one, it means that goods at home have become more expensive than goods abroad.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"1.Statement 1 is correct as the real exchange rate is calculated by adjusting the nominal exchange rate with purchasing power parity between the two countries.
2.Statement 2 is not correct. A real rate higher than 1 means that the goods abroad have become expensive. The real exchange rate measures prices abroad relative to those at home. If the real exchange rate is equal to one, currencies are at purchasing power parity. This means that goods cost the same in two countries when measured in the same currency. If the real exchange rises above one, this means that goods abroad have become more expensive than goods at home",Hint 95,1,2
Which of the following is/are the advantages of a fully convertible rupee?1.Increased liquidity in financial markets.2.Development of onshore rupee market.3.Complete determination of currency exchange rate by the RBI.4.Easy access to foreign capital.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 4 only",3 and 4 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",2,"1.Statement 1 is correct: Increased liquidity in financial markets: Full capital account convertibility opens up the countrys markets to global players, including investors, businesses and trade partners. This allows easy access to capital for different businesses and sectors, positively impacting a nations economy.
2.Statement 2 is correct: Onshore rupee market development: The growing international interest in the Indian rupee is evident from the development of offshore rupee markets in locations like Dubai, London, New York and Singapore. This can be seen from the rise in the average daily foreign exchange market turnover from $16 billion in 2005-06 to nearly $55 billion in 2014-15 so far, according to the Business Standard. However, due to existence of capital controls in local Indian markets, the offshorecenters are gaining the trading business. Making the rupee fully convertible will enable these trades to happen in India, helping national markets with improved liquidity, better regulatory purview and reduced dependence and risks from offshore market participants.
3.Statement 3 is not correct: Full convertibility will mean the rupee exchange rate would be left to market factors, without any regulatory intervention. There may be no limit on inflow or outflow of capital for various purposes (including investments, remittances or asset purchase/sale).
4.Statement 4 is correct: Easy access to foreign capital: Local businesses can benefit from easy access to foreign loans at comparatively lower costs (low interest rates). Indian companies currently have to take the ADR/GDR route to list in foreign exchanges. After full convertibility, they will be able to directly raise equity capital from overseas markets.",Hint 96,1,3
Which of the following functions is/areperformed by RBI?1.Protection of depositors interest2.Managing of foreign exchange.3.Performs merchant banking function forthe central and the state governments Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"Main Functions of RBI:
1.Monetary Authority: Formulates, implements and monitors the monetarypolicy.Objective: maintaining price stability and ensuring adequate flow of credit to productive sectors.
2.Regulator and supervisor of the financial system: Prescribes broad parameters of banking operations
within which the countrys banking and financial systemfunctions.Objective: maintain public confidence in the system, protect depositors interest and provide cost-effective banking services to the public.
3.Manager of Foreign Exchange Manages the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999.
Objective: to facilitate external trade and payment and promote orderly development and maintenance of foreign exchange market in India.
Issuer of currency: Issues and exchanges or destroys currency and coins not fit for circulation.
4.Objective: to give the public adequate quantity of supplies of currency notes and coins and in good quality.
5.Developmental role: Performs a wide range of promotional functions to support national objectives.
6.Related Functions: Banker to the Government: performs merchant banking function for the central and the state governments; also acts as their banker.
Banker to banks: maintains banking accounts of all scheduled banks.",Hint 97,1,1
Which of the following is/are examples of narrow money?1.Currency2.Net demand deposits3.Saving deposits with Post office saving banks4.Net time depositsSelect the correct answer using the codes given below.,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 3 and 4 only",2 and 4 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",1,"Legal Definitions: Narrow and Broad Money
Money supply, like money demand, is a stock variable. The total stock of money in circulation among the public at a particular point of time is called money supply. RBI publishes figures for four alternative measures of money supply, viz. M1, M2, M3 and M4. They are defined as follows:
M1 = CU + DD
M2 = M1 + Savings deposits with Post Office savings banks M3 = M1 + Net time deposits of commercial banks
M4 = M3 + Total deposits with Post Office savings organisations (excluding National Savings Certificates)
Where, CU is currency (notes plus coins) held by the public and DD is net demand deposits held by commercial banks. The word â€˜netâ€™ implies that only deposits of the public held by the banks are to be included in money supply. The interbank deposits, which a commercial bank holds in other commercial banks, are not to be regarded as part of money supply. M1 and M2 are known as narrow money. M3 and M4 are known as broad money. These gradations are in decreasing order of liquidity. M1 is most liquid and easiest for transactions whereas M4 is least liquid of all. M3 is the most commonly used measure of money supply. It is also known as aggregate monetary resources.",Hint 98,1,2
Maintaining a Cash Reserve Ratio CRR) is not mandatory for which of the following banks in India?1.Banks with capital base below a certain limit prescribed by RBI2.Banks that lend majority of their capital to micro finance units3.Banks that have sponsored self-help groups to promote financial inclusionand developmentSelect the correct answer using the code below.,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 only,None,4,"1.Maintaining CRR is compulsory for all banks irrespective of the conditions mentioned in statements 1, 2 and 3.
2.CRR is the amount that the banks have to keep with the RBI. The banks do not earn any interest rate on this CRR, which the banks also called dead asset.",Hint 99,1,3
Which of the following reports are published by the International Monetary Fund IMF) ?1.Doing Business Report2.Global Competitive Index3.World Economic Outlook4.Global Financial Stability ReportSelect the correct answer using code given below.,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 4 only",3 and 4 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",3,"IMF Publish the GLOBAL Financial Stability Report and World Economic Outlook Report:
1.World Economic Outlook contains integral elements of the IMFs surveillance of economic developments and policies in its member countries, of developments in international financial markets, and of the global economic system.
2.The Global Financial Stability Report provides an assessment of the global financial system and markets, and addresses emerging market financing in a global context.
3.The Global Competitiveness Report (GCR) is a yearly report published by the World EconomicForum.The Global Competitiveness Indexs annual reports are somewhat similar to the Ease of Doing Business Index and the Indices of Economic Indices of Economic Freedom, which also look at factors affecting economic growth (but not as many as the Global Competitiveness Report).
4.The Doing Business Report (DB) is a study elaborated by the World Bank Group since 2003 every year. Doing Business presents quantitative indicators on business regulations and the protection of property rights that can be compared across 190 economies.",Hint 100,1,1
"With reference to Bank rate and Repo rate, consider the following statements:1.While Bank rate is used for long term lending by RBI to commercial banks, Repo rate is used for short term.2.While lending at Bank rate requires government securities as collateral Repo rate does not require Governmentsecurities as collateral.Which of the above statements is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2 only,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"1.Bank Rate: In simple words Bank rate is the rate at which central bank (RBI) lends money to commercial banks for meeting shortfall for a long period without selling or buying any security.
2.Repo rate: Rate at which central bank(RBI) lends money to commercial bank for short term liquidity needs. This involves bank selling securities to RBI to borrow the money with an agreement to repurchase (repurchase agreement) them at a later date and at a predetermined price.
3.Hence Statement 1 is correct and 2 is not correct.",Hint 101,1,2
Money supply in an economy can be measured using1.Currency notes and coins2.Demand deposits with commercial banks3.Saving deposits with Post officesSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"There are four measures of money supply in India which are denoted by M1, M2, M3 and M4. The first measure of money supply, M1 consists of:
1.Currency with the public which includes notes and coins of all denominations in circulation excluding cash on hand with banks:
2.Demand deposits with commercial and cooperative banks, excluding inter-bank deposits; and 3.Other deposits with RBI which include current deposits of foreign central banks, financial institutions and quasi-financial institutions such as IDBI, IFCI, etc., other than of banks, IMF, IBRD, etc. The RBI characterizes as narrow money.
The second measure of money supply is M2 which consists of M1 plus post office savings bank deposits. Since savings bank deposits of commercial and cooperative banks are included in the money supply, it is essential to include post office savings bank deposits. The majority of people in rural and urban India have preference for post office deposits from the safety viewpoint than bank deposits.
The third measure of money supply in India is M3, which consists of M1, plus time deposits with commercial and cooperative banks, excluding interbank time deposits. The RBI calls M3 as broad money.
The fourth measure of money supply is M4 which consists of M3 plus total post office deposits comprising time deposits and demand deposits as well. This is the broadest measure of money supply.",Hint 102,1,3
Which of the following is/are determined by the quota of a member country at IMF?1.Financial resources a member is obliged to provide to the IMF.2.Voting power of the member country.3.Amount of financing a member can obtain from the IMF.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Quotas play several key roles in the IMF: A membersquota determines thatcountrys financial and organizational relationship with the IMF,including:Â
2.Subscriptions . A members quota subscription determines the maximum amountoffinancial resources the member is obliged to provide to the IMF.
3.Voting power . The quota largely determines a members voting power in IMF decisions. Each IMF members votes are comprised of basic votes plus one additional vote for each SDR 100,000 of quota.
4.Access to financing . The amount of financing a member can obtain from the IMF (its access limit) is based on its quota. For example, under Stand-By and Extended Arrangements, a member can borrow up to 145 percent of its quota annually and 435 percent cumulatively.",Hint 103,1,1
"According to RBI, Banks are required to classify Special Mention Accounts SMA) for which of the following reasons?",Categorization for different sectors in Priority Sector Lending.,Capital norms as per Basel III norms.,Early recognition of stressed assets.,None of the above,3,"Before a loan account turns into a NPA, banks are required to identify incipient stress in the account by creating three sub-categories under the Special Mention Account (SMA) category as given in the table below:
SMA Sub-categories SMA-0
SMA-1 SMA-2
Basis for classification
Principal or interest payment not overdue for more than 30 days but account showing signs of incipient stress (Please see Annex)
Principal or interest payment overdue between 31-60 days Principal or interest payment overdue between 61-90 days",Hint 104,1,2
Which of the following is the component of Capital Account of Balance of Payments?,Investments by Indian residents in shares of foreign companies,Import of goods and services,Investment income in the form of interest,Private remittances,1,"Option (a) is correct. Rest three are part of current account.
Balance of Payments refers to the systematic summary record of a countrys financial transactions with the rest of the world, over a period of time. It comprises of:
Capital Account:
Capital account of BOP records all those transactions, between the residents of a country and the rest of the world, which cause a change in the assets or liabilities of the residents of the country or itsgovernment.Components of Capital Account:
The main components of capital account are:
1. Borrowings andlendings to and from abroad: It includes:
A. All transactions relating to borrowings from abroad by private sector, government, etc. Receipts of such loans and repayment of loans by foreigners are recorded on the positive (credit) side.
B. All transactions of lending to abroad by private sector and government. Lending abroad and repayment of loans to abroad is recorded as negative or debit item.
2. Investments to and from abroad: It includes:
A. Investments by rest of the world in shares of Indian companies, real estate in India, etc. Such investments from abroad are recorded on the positive (credit) side as they bring in foreign exchange.
B. Investments by Indian residents in shares of foreign companies, real estate abroad, etc. Such investments to abroad be recorded on the negative (debit) side as they lead to outflow of foreign exchange.
3. Change in Foreign Exchange Reserves",Hint 105,1,3
Which of the following policy instruments are used by RBI to maintain reserve deposit ratio in banks?1.Cash Reserve Ratio2.Statutory Liquidity Ratio3.Bank RateSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 2 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.The Reserve Deposit Ratio: Reserve deposit ratio (RDR) is the proportion of the total deposits commercial banks keep as reserves.
2.Keeping reserves is costly for banks, as, otherwise, they could lend this balance to interest earning investment projects. However, RBI requires commercial banks to keep reserves in order to ensure that banks have a safe cushion of assets to draw on when account holders want to be paid.
3.RBI uses various policy instruments to bring forth a healthy Reserve Deposit Ratio (RDR) in commercial banks.
4.The first instrument is the Cash Reserve Ratio which specifies the fraction of their deposits that banks must keep with RBI. There is another tool called Statutory Liquidity Ratio which requires the banks to maintain a given fraction of their total demand and time deposits in the form of specified liquid assets. Apart from these ratios RBI uses a certain interest rate called the Bank Rate to control the value of RDR. Commercial banks can borrow money from RBI at the bank rate when they run short of reserves. A high bank rate makes such borrowing from RBI costly and, in effect, encourages the commercial banks to maintain a healthy RDR.",Hint 106,1,1
"With reference to economy, what does the Seigniorage, refer to?",The delivery of financial services at affordable costs to disadvantaged and low-income segments of society.,The economic cost of producing a currency within a country.,The total value of all goods and services produced over a specific time period in an economy.,Actions taken by a countrys central bank to counter the effects on the money supply caused by a balance of payments surplus. ,2,"1.Option (b) is correct:Seigniorage is the difference between the value of money and the cost to produce it in other words, its the economic cost of producing a currency within a given economy or country. If theseigniorage is positive, then the government will make an economic profit; a negativeseigniorage will result in an economic loss.
2.Option (a) refers to financial inclusion which isis the delivery of financial services at affordable costs to sections of disadvantaged and low-income segments of society.
3.Option (c) refers to Gross Domestic product which is the total value of all goods and services produced over a specific time period.
4.Option (d) refers to Sterilization which are the actions taken by a countrys central bank to counter the effects on the money supply caused by a balance of payments surplus or deficit.",Hint 107,1,2
"With reference to the Money market instruments in India, Consider the following statements regarding Treasury Bills:1.They are issued at a price which is lower than their face value and repaid at par.2.They are issued to meet short-term requirement of funds of central government.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"1.Statement 1 is correct. Treasury bills are issued at a price which is lower than their face value and repaid at par. The difference between the price at which the treasury bills are issued and their redemption value is the interest receivable on them and is called discount.
2.A Treasury bill is basically an instrument of short-term borrowing by the Government of India maturing in less than one year. They are also known as Zero Coupon Bonds.
3.Statement 2 is correct. They are issued by the Reserve Bank of India on behalf of the Central Government to meet its short-term requirement of funds. Treasury bills are issued in the form of a promissory note.",Hint 108,1,3
Consider the following statements regarding Domestic Systemically Important Banks D-SIBs):1.These are banks whose failure would have an impact on the entire domestic financial system.2.Banks are designated as D-SIBs by the Bank Board Bureau.3.Currently State Bank of India and ICICI Bank Ltd are designated as D-SIBs.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 only,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Statement 1 is correct: Domestic systemically important banks (D-SIBs) are banks whose failure would have an impact on the domestic financial system or real economy. The rationale for imposing capital buffers on systemically important banks (SIBs) is at least twofold.
First, capital buffers reduce the probability of failure of SIBs, which may be desirable given the high economic and social cost of their failure. Second, capital buffers require SIBs to internalize externalities they impose on the financial system, and the buffers may provide incentives for SIBs to reduce their systemic importance.
2.Statement 2 is not correct: RBI discloses the names of banks designated as D-SIBs every year in August starting August 2015. RBI chooses these banks as D-SIBs primarily because of their size. The RBI uses a methodology to determine whether a bank is systemically important or not on the basis of its size, inter-connectedness, substitutability and complexity. Such banks have been termed as domestic- systemically important banks (D-SIB).
3.Statement 3 is correct: The Reserve Bank of India announced State Bank of India and ICICI Bank Ltd as Domestic Systemically Important Banks (D-SIBs) & subjected them to higher levels of supervision to prevent disruption to financial services in event of any failure.",Hint 109,1,1
"Which of the following organizations is mandated to implement the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 and Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002?",Directorate of Enforcement,Central Economic Intelligence Bureau,Financial Intelligence Unit - India,Integrated Financial Unit,1,"1.The Directorate of Enforcement is headed by the Director of Enforcement. The Directorate of Enforcement implements two Acts viz. Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (FEMA) and Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA). FEMA replaced the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (FERA) with effect from 01.06.2000. The Directorate also continues to perform the residual work under the repealed FERA, 1973. The Directorate also implements the provisions of COFEPOSA, 1974.",Hint 110,1,2
"With reference to Green Masala Bonds, consider the following statements:1.They are used to raise money from overseas markets in any hard currency.2.Money raised from these bonds is used for development of renewable energy projects.3.They can be raised by both public and private enterprises.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.Statement 1 is not correct: Masala bond is a term used to refer to a financial instrument through which Indian entities can raise money from overseas markets in the rupee, not foreign currency. These are Indian rupee denominated bonds issued in offshore capital markets. The rupee denominated bond is an attempt to shield issuers from currency risk and instead transfer the risk to investors buying these bonds.
2.Statement 2 is correct: The proceeds of the green Masala bonds are invested in the renewable energy projects.
3.Statement 3 is correct: They can be raised by both public and private enterprises. Recently NTPC listed worlds first Indian green Masala bonds.",Hint 111,1,3
Which among the following best describes the term Wholesale Banking?,Providing payment services and deposit products to small businesses and low-income households only.,"Providing liquidity to commercial banks,
financial institutions and large corporates.",Providing banking services through regional rural banks.,Selling of non-performing assets to asset reconstruction companies for improving the balance sheets.,2,"1.Wholesale banking involves providing banking services to other commercial banks, mortgage brokers, large corporate, mid-size companies, real estate developers, international trading businesses, institutional customers or other corporations. The services which come under the net of wholesale banking involves wholesaling, underwriting, market making, consultancy, mergers and acquisitions, joint ventures, fund management etc. The focus is on high-level clients and high-value transactions.",Hint 112,1,1
"With reference to the participatory notes (p-notes) in India, consider the following statements:1.The value of p-notes is determined on the basis of shares bought on Indian stock exchange.2.An Indian citizen residing in India is not allowed to invest in p-notes.3.An entity investing in p-notes has to comply with Indian KYC norms.Which of the above statements is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Statement 1 is correct: P-Notes or Participatory Notes are Overseas Derivative Instruments that have Indian stocks as their underlying assets i.e. their value is determines as per the price of stock in which they are invested.
2.Statement 2 is correct: They are means through which foreign investors not registered with SEBI invest in the Indian capital market. These instruments are not open for domestic investors.
3.Statement 3 is correct: As per recently released guidelines by SEBI, entities investing in P Notes has to comply with Indian KYC norms.",Hint 113,1,2
"With reference to stock variables and flowvariables, which of the following are classified as flow variables?1.Income2.Profits3.Bank Balance4.Equity ShareholdingsSelect the correct answer using the code given below.",1 and 2 only,3 and 4 only,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 2, 3 and 4",1,"1.Flows are defined over a period of time. Thus income, outputs or profits are concepts that make sense only when a time period is specified. These are called flows because they occur in a period of time.
2.Stock variables are defined at a particular point of time. Bank Balance is a stock variable while withdrawals and interests earned are flow variables. Equity shareholding is a stock variable while sale and purchase of shares are flow variables.
3.Hence A is the correct answer.",Hint 114,1,3
Consider the  following  statements  withrespect to Basel III norms:1.It ensures that financial institutions have enough capital to ensure liquidity and stability.2.It requires banks to maintain high Tier I capital.3.They are binding on all members of WTO.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3 only",2,"1.Statements 1 is correct: In 2010, Basel III guidelines were released. These guidelines were introduced in response to the financial crisis of 2008. A need was felt to further strengthen the system as banks in the developed economies were under-capitalized, over-leveraged and had a greater reliance on short-term funding. Also the quantity and quality of capital under Basel II were deemed insufficient to contain any further risk. Basel III norms aim at making most banking activities such as their trading book activities more capital-intensive. The guidelines aim to promote a more resilient banking system by focusing on four vital banking parameters viz. capital, leverage, funding and liquidity.
2.Statement 2 is correct : Banks have to maintain Tier-one capital (equity and reserves) at 7 per cent of risk weighted assets (RWA) and a capital conservation buffer of 2.5 per cent of RWA.
3.Statement 3 is not correct: The purpose of Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) is to encourage convergence toward common approaches and standards. The Committee is not a classical multilateral organization, in part because it has no founding treaty. BCBS does not issue binding regulation; rather, it functions as an informal forum in which policy solutions and standards are developed.",Hint 115,1,1
"White label atms, often seen in news, are:","ATMs which are set up, owned and operated by private non-bank companies.","ATMs where hardware of the ATM machine is owned by a service provider, but cash management is provided by a sponsor bank.","ATMs which are set up, owned and operated by schedule commercial banks.","ATMS which are set up, owned and operated by the local self-governments.",1,"1.To aid financial inclusion and drive ATM penetration in the country the Reserve Bank of India has permitted the launch of White Labelled ATMs (WLAs)i.e private non-bank companies to set up, own and operate their own brand of ATMs in the country.",Hint 116,1,2
"Priority sector lending by Banks constitute lending for:1.Nuclear power plants2.Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises3.Education and health4.Housing5.AgricultureSelect the correct answer using the code given below.",1 and 4 only,"1, 2, 3 and 5 only",3 and 5 only,"2, 3, 4 and 5 only",4,"1.There are eight broad categories of the Priority Sector Lending viz. (1) Agriculture (2) Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (3) Export Credit (4) Education (5) Housing (6) Social Infrastructure (7) Renewable Energy (8) Others.
2.Others include Personal loans to weaker sections distressed persons, Scheduled Castes/ Scheduled Tribes for the specific purpose etc.
3.Nuclear power plants do not come under the priority sectorlendings.
4.Thus option (d) is the correct answer.",Hint 117,1,3
"With reference to NABARD, consider the following statements:1.It is a statutory body.2.It provides subsidized loans to farmers.3.It operates under the dual role of RBIand Government of India.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Statement 1 is correct. Established in 1982 on the recommendations ofShivaraman Committee to implement the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development Act, 1981. It replaced the Agricultural Credit Department (ACD) and Rural Planning and Credit Cell (RPCC) of Reserve Bank of India, and Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation (ARDC). It is one of the premier agencies providing developmental credit in rural areas. NABARD is Indias specialised bank for Agriculture and Rural Development in India.
2.Statement 2 is not correct. Lends it downwards to State cooperative banks (SCB), Regional Rural banks (RRBs), Microfinance institutions, cooperative credit societies etc. Thats how farmers, villagers, cottage/handicraft, self-help group (SHG) get loans at reasonable interest rate. Acts as the regulatory authority for cooperative banks and regional rural banks. Operates the Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF). Known for its SHG Bank Linkage Programme which encourages Indias banks to lend to Self Help Group (SHGs)
3.Statement 3 is correct. NABARD was set up with an initial capital of Rs.100 crore. Consequent to the revision in the composition of share capital between Government of India and RBI, the paid up capital as on 31 March 2015, stood at Rs. 5000 crore with Government of India holding Rs. 4,980 crore (99.60%) and Reserve Bank of India 20.00 crore (0.40%).",Hint 118,1,1
Consider the following statements with respect to Banks Board Bureau BBB):1.It is mandated to recommend for selection of heads of Public sector banks and Financial Institutions.2.It is a component of Indradhanush Plan.3.. It is headed by the RBI governor. Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"1.Statement 1 and 2 are correct: Banks Board Bureau was set up as part of theIndradhanush programme to revamp state-run banks. It replaced the existing system of Appointments Board in which appointments for top level jobs at PSBs were made by an appointments committee led by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Governor.
2.Composition: It will be six members body with at least 3 former bankers, 2 professionals and secretary, department of financial services representing government. Hence statement 3 is incorrect. Vinod Rai, former comptroller and auditor general of India, is the chairman of the bureau.
3.Functions: To give recommendations for the appointment of full-time Directors as well as non-Executive Chairman of PSBs. Give advice to PSBs in developing differentiated strategies for raising funds through innovative financial methods and instruments and to deal with issues of stressed assets. Guide banks on mergers and consolidations.",Hint 119,1,2
Consider the following statements with respect to Liquidity Adjustment Facility LAF):1.It is a long term credit control measure of the central bank.2.It infuses and absorbs excess liquidity through Repo rate and Reverse repo rate.3.Monetary Policy Committee is mandated to decide on key rates to carry out Liquidity Adjustment in India.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) is the primary instrument of Reserve Bank of India for controlling liquidity. Its a short term credit control measure of the central bank. Hence statement 1 is incorrect.
2.The two components of LAF are repo rate and reverse repo rate. Under Repo, the banks borrow money from RBI to meet short term needs by putting government securities (G-secs) as collateral. Under Reverse Repo, RBI borrows money from banks by lending securities. While repo injects liquidity into the system, the Reverse repo absorbs the liquidity from the system. RBI only announces Repo Rate. The Reverse Repo Rate is linked to Repo Rate. Recently Monetary Policy Committee has been mandated to decide on key rates to carry out Liquidity Adjustment in India. Hence only statements 2 and 3 are correct.",Hint 120,1,3
Which of the following statements is/are correct about the Foreign Currency Non Resident FCNR) account?1.It is an account that can be maintained by both NRIs as well as PIOs.2.It can be maintained in both foreign and Indian currency.3.It can be opened as both savings as well as fixed deposit accounts.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,1 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.Statement 1 is correct: An FCNR account is a term deposit account that can be maintained by NRIs and PIOs.
2.Statement 2 is not correct: The FCNR deposits are allowed in any permitted currency. Permittedcurrency for this purpose would mean a foreign currency which is freely convertible including: US dollar, Pound Sterling (GBP), Euro, Japanese Yen, Australian dollar and Canadian dollar. It cannot be maintained in Indian Rupee.
3.Statement 3 is not correct: FCNRs are not savings accounts but fixed deposit accounts.",Hint 121,1,1
Which of the following is used by the Reserve Bank of India to anchor its monetary policy?,CPI-Agricultural Labour,CPI-Industrial Worker,WPI,CPI combined),4,"1.The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has started using CPI-combined as the sole inflation measure for the purpose of monetary policy. As per the agreement on Monetary Policy Framework between the Government and the RBI dated February 20, 2015 the sole of objective of RBI is price stability and a target is set for inflation as measured by the Consumer Price Index-Combined.",Hint 122,1,2
Quantitative Easing involves which of thefollowing?1.Buying of government securities by the Central Bank2.Short-term interest rates approaching near zero level3.Printing of new currencySelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 2 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.Quantitative easing is an unconventional monetary policy in which a central bank purchases government securities or other securities from the market in order to lower interest rates and increase the money supply.
2.Quantitative easing increases the money supply by flooding financial institutions with capital in an effort to promote increased lending and liquidity. Quantitative easing is considered when short-term interest rates are at or approaching zero, and does not involve the printing of new banknotes.",Hint 123,1,3
Which of the following are the qualitative methods used to ration credit by the Central Bank?,Regulation of margin requirements,Variable portfolio ceiling,Moral suasion,All of the above,4,"All the options are methods of Qualitative/selective credit control of the Central Bank. In rationing of credit method, the maximum credit flow to a particular sector is controlled.
1.Regulation of margin requirements: Every commercial bank has to keep a margin whenever it extends loans against the security. If the central bank wants to decrease the money supply it can do so by increasing the margin requirements. In this way amount of loan decreases.
2.Variable portfolio ceiling; where different ceiling is fixed for different portfolios (sectors).
3.Moral suasion is a persuasion tactic used by an authority(Central Bank) to influence and pressure, but not force, banks into adhering to policy. Tactics used are closed-door meetings with bank directors, increased severity of inspections, appeals to community spirit, or vague threats.",Hint 124,1,1
Which of the following best describes bankruptcy?,Inability of a person or corporate to pay up his debt at the due date.,When a firm is declared by an authority as incapable of paying up its debt at any time.,Winding up of a corporation or incorporated entity.,a plan proposed by any authorized person/entity for enabling the overdue payments.,2,"1.Insolvency refers to the inability of a person or corporate to pay up his debt /bills as and when they become due. He may be able to pay at a later date some amount or even in full, but at the promised date of payment, he is unable to make the payment. Insolvency leads to the state of default.
2.Bereft of outright fraud, the default can happen due to financial failure (as evidenced by cash flow test) or business failure (as determined by balance sheet test).
3.Resolution refers to a plan proposed by any authorised person/entity for enabling the overdue payments of a corporate debtor through restructuring or through part payments, while allowing the corporate debtor to continue as a going concern.
4.Bankruptcy is the next state of insolvency where an individual and partnership firm is declared by the relevant authority under a specified law for the purpose, as incapable of paying up his debt / bills at any time in present as well as in the foreseeable future. Generally, failure of resolution process leads to bankruptcy.
5.Liquidation is the winding up of a corporation or incorporated entity under the supervision of a person or liquidator, empowered under law for such operation and for distribution of proceeds to the various creditors as per an agreed formula. Only firms can be liquidated. Defaulting individuals cannot be liquidated.",Hint 125,1,2
Which of the following constitute a part of double financial repression on Indian banking system?1.Statutory Liquidity Ratio2.Cash Reserve Ratio3.Priority Sector lending4.High InflationSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 3 only,2 and 4 only,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 2, 3 and 4",4,"1.Double financial repression is both the asset and liability side.
2.Financial repression on the asset side of the balance sheet is created by the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) requirement that forces banks to hold government securities, and priority sector lending (PSL) that forces resource deployment inlessthan-fully efficient ways. Financial repression on the liability side has arisen from high inflation since 2007, leading to negative real interest rates, and a sharp reduction in households financial savings. As India exits from liability-side repression with declining inflation, the time may be appropriate for addressing its asset-side counterparts.",Hint 126,1,3
Consider the following statements about Fiat Money:1.It is currency declared as legal tender by the government.2.It is backed by a physical commodity.3.Demonetized currency is an example of fiat money.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"1.Statement 1 is correct. Fiat money is a currency that a government has declared to be legal tender.
2.Statement 2 is not correct. It is not backed by a physical commodity. The value of fiat money is derived from the relationship between supply and demand rather than the value of the material that the money is made of. Historically, most currencies were based on physical commodities such as gold or silver, but fiat money is based solely on the faith and credit of the economy.
3.Statement 3 is not correct: Demonetized currencies are not fiat money as they are not legal tender.",Hint 127,1,1
Which of the following is obtained when revenue expenditure resulting in the creation of capital assets is excluded from revenue deficit?,Primary Deficit,Budget Deficit,Effective Revenue Deficit,Fiscal Deficit,3,"1.Broadly, the expenditure which does not result in creation of assets for the Government of India, is treated as revenue expenditure. All grants given to the State Governments/Union Territories and other parties are also treated as revenue expenditure even though some of the grants may be used for creation of capital assets. Revenue expenditure which results in the creation of capital assets is reduced from revenue deficit to arrive at the effective revenue deficit (ERD).",Hint 128,1,2
"With reference to Marginal Cost of LendingRate MCLR), consider the following statements:1.It is the minimum interest rate for loans.2.It is replaces the base rate system3.It is determined by the RBI.Select the correct answer using the code given below.",1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.Statement 1 is correct. The marginal cost of funds based lending rate (MCLR) refers to the minimum interest rate of a bank below which it cannot lend, except in some cases allowed by the RBI. It is an internal benchmark or reference rate for the bank.
2.Statement 2 is correct. The MCLR methodology for fixing interest rates for advances was introduced by the Reserve Bank of India with effect from April 1, 2016. This new methodology replaces the base rate system introduced in July 2010.
3.Statement 3 is not correct. MCLR actually describes the method by which the minimum interest rate for loans is determined by a bank - on the basis of marginal cost or the additional or incremental cost of arranging one more rupee to the prospective borrower.",Hint 129,1,3
Money in a modern economy acts as:1.Medium of exchange2.Unit of account3.Store of value4.Standard of deferred paymentSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,2 and 4 only,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 2, 3 and 4",4,"All the four are main functions of money in a modern economy:
1.Money is a medium of exchange because it can be used to buy goods and services.
2.Money acts as a convenient unit of account. The value of all goods and services can be expressed in monetary units.
3.Money is not perishable and its storage costs are also considerably lower. It is also acceptable to anyone at any point of time. Thus money can act as a store of value for individuals
4.Another function of money is that it serves as a standard for deferred payments. Deferred payments mean those payments which are to be made in the future.",Hint 130,1,1
The government of India is setting up Skill Banks to:,Facilitate refinancing of banks lending under Skill India Mission.,Provide skills to women in disturbed areas.,provide skills to youth emigrating to other countries.,Train teachers for promoting entrepreneurship among children.,3,"1.The government is setting up 50 global skill banks in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar to train potential immigrant workers in 110 job roles as per international standards. These banks, or training centres, will impart skills across sectors such as medicine and healthcare, hospitality, IT, construction, automobile and retail trade - where job opportunities exist or are likely to arise across different countries. Before they emigrate, youth trained in these skill banks would also be made familiar with the respective local culture and language of the country they obtain a job in as well as its work ethic.",Hint 131,1,2
India is not a member of which of the following agencies of World Bank?,International Bank for Reconstruction and Development IBRD).,International Development Association IDA).,International Finance Corporation IFC).,International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes ICSID).,4,"World Bank Group is not just World bank but comprises of 5 institutions managed by their member countries. These 5 institutions are as follows:
1.International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD): Commonly known as the world bank. It is the single largest provider of development loans
2.International Development Association (IDA): assists the poorest countries
3.International Finance Corporation (IFC): supports private enterprise in developing countries.
4.Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA): offers investors insurance against non-commercial risk and help developing country governments attract foreign investment
5.International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID): encourages the flow of foreign investment to developing countries through arbitration and conciliation facilities
Except for ICSID, India is member of other four groups.",Hint 132,1,3
"With reference to Market Stabilization Scheme Bonds, consider the following statements1.They are special bonds issued by the RBI on behalf of the government with the objective of managing excess liquidity.2.They qualify for SLR requirements that banks needs to maintain in the form of treasury bills and government bonds.3.They are raised through an auction and are tradable in the secondary market.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.MSS Bonds are special bonds floated on behalf of the government by the RBI for the specific purpose of mopping up the excess liquidity in the system when regular government bonds prove inadequate.
2.These are mostly shorter-tenure bonds, of less than six months maturity. But the tenure differs depending on the requirement.
3.MSS bonds earn a return and qualify for statutory liquidity ratio, or SLR, that banks need to maintain in the form of short-tenured treasury bills and government bonds.
4.MSS bonds, too, are raised through an auction and are tradable in the secondary market.
5.The regular government bonds are part of the governments borrowing programme and the interestpayout on these has an impact on the fiscal position.
6.The MSS bills and securities are matched by an equivalent cash balance held by the government with the Reserve Bank. Hence, they have only a marginal impact on the governments revenue and fiscal positions. The cost of such interest payment is shown separately in the Budget.
7.When the demonetisation of Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 notes led to a surge in deposits, the Reserve Bank of India asked banks to set aside all deposits received between September 16, 2016 and November 11, 2016 as cash reserve ratio or CRR. Later, the central bank decided to issue market stabilisation scheme (MSS) bonds to manage the excess liquidity.",Hint 133,1,1
Which of the following could be an effect of Deficit Financing?1.Increase in public debt2.Fall in price levels3.Widening of income inequalitySelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 3 only,2 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"Deficit financing, practice in which a government spends more money than it receives as revenue, the difference being made up by borrowing or minting new funds. Although budget deficits may occur for numerous reasons, the term usually refers to a conscious attempt to stimulate the economy by lowering tax rates or increasing government expenditures.
Disadvantages of deficit financing:
1.Inflation: Deficit financing increases the total volume of money supply in the country and, therefore, raises the aggregate demand for goods and services. In the absence of a corresponding increase in aggregate supply of goods and services, deficit financing leads to rise in the price level.
2.Affects the distribution of income: Since, deficit financing is inflationary in character, it affects different sections of the society differently. ThebusiÂness classes will be benefitted out of rise in price and increased profit earnings. On the contrary wage earners and fixed income group suffer on account of reduction in purchasing power resulting from sharp rise in price and decreased value of money. As a resultinÂequality in the distribution of income increases.
3.It distorts investment pattern: Higher profit motive induces investors to invest their resources in quick profit-yielding industries. Of course, investment in such industries is not desirable in the interest of a countrys economic development.
4.Deficit financing may not yield good result in the creation of employment opportunities: Creation of additionalemployÂment is usually hampered in backward countries due to lack of raw materials and machineries even if adequate finance is available.
5.As purchasing power of money declines consequent upon inflationary price rise, a country experiences flight ofcapital abroad for safereturnthereby leading to a scarcity of capital.
6.The inflationary trend due to deficit financing, leads to a larger volume of deficit in a countrys balance of payments. Following inflationary rise in prices, export declines while import bill rises, and resources get transferred from export industries to import- competing industries.",Hint 134,1,2
Which of the following statements regarding small finance banks is/are correct?1.They are required to maintain both CRR and SLR.2.They are not required to follow Priority Sector Lending norms.3.Foreign investments in these banks is not permitted.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"Key features of the Small Finance Bank guidelines are:
1.Small finance banks are a type of niche banks in India. Banks with a small finance bank license can provide basic banking service of acceptance of deposits and lending. The objectives of setting up of small finance banks will be beneficial in financial inclusion by a) Provision of savings vehicles and b) Supply of credit to small business units, small and marginal farmers, micro and small industries and other unorganised sector entities, through high technology-low cost operations.
2.Statement 1 is correct: The small finance bank are subjected to all prudential norms and regulations of RBI as applicable to existing commercial banks including requirement of maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR). No forbearance would be provided for complying with the statutory provisions.
3.Statement 2 is not correct: The small finance banks will be required to extend 75 percent of its Adjusted Net Bank Credit (ANBC) to the sectors eligible for classification as priority sector lending (PSL) by the Reserve Bank.
4.Statement 3 is not correct: The foreign shareholding in the small finance bank would be as per the Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) policy for private sector banks as amended from time to time.",Hint 135,1,3
Which of the following is /are correct with respect to Payment banks?1.They cannot accept term deposits.2.They can provide forex services.3.They can provide both debit and credit cards.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"1.RBI recently granted in principle approval for payment banks to 11 entities, including Reliance Industries, Aditya BirlaNuvo and Tech Mahindra, as also Airtel and Vodafone.
2.Payment banks can accept demand deposits. This implies that customers can open savings accounts as well as current accounts; but NO time deposits (such as FDs). Payment Banks can NOT give loans. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
3.They offer forex services at charges lower than banks i.e. they exchange one currency for another or the conversion of one currency into another currency. Hence, statement 2 is correct.
4.A payment bank can become Banking Correspondent of another bank and offer all products / services. Payment Banks can distribute non-risk sharing financial products like mutual fund units and insurance products, etc. The revenue of these banks would come mainly from the transactionfees. Payment Banks can issue ATM/debit cards but not credit cards. Hence statement 3 is not correct.",Hint 136,1,1
"With reference to the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 2015, consider the following statements:1.It aims to set up Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India.2.It abolishes National Company Law Tribunal NCLT).3.It covers insolvency resolution ofcompanies as well as individuals.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India will be set up to regulate functioning of Insolvency Professionals, Insolvency Professional Agencies and Intelligence Utilities. (Statement 1 is correct)
2.The National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) will adjudicate insolvency resolution for companies. The Debt Recovery Tribunal (DRT) will adjudicate insolvency resolution for individuals. (Statement 2 is incorrect)
3.The Code creates time-bound processes for insolvency resolution of companies and individuals. These processes will be completed within 180 days. (Statement 3 is correct)
4.The resolution processes will be conducted by licensed insolvency professionals (IPs).
5.Information utilities (IUs) will be established to collect, collate and disseminate financial information to facilitate insolvency resolution.",Hint 137,1,2
Which of the following functions are performed by the MUDRA Bank?1.Refinancing of scheduled banks which finance micro enterprises.2.Encouraging women entrepreneurs.3.Securitization of loan portfolio of banks.4.Accreditation of micro finance institutions.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,"1, 3 and 4 only",2 and 3 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",4,"The funding support from MUDRA are of four types:
1.Micro Credit Scheme (MCS) for loansupto 1 lakh finance throughMFIs.: Micro Credit Scheme is offered mainly through Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs), which deliver the creditupto Rs.1 lakh, for various micro enterprise activities. Although, the mode of delivery may be through groups like SHGs/JLGs, the loans are given to the individuals for specific income generating micro enterprise activity.
2.Refinance Scheme for Commercial Banks / Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) / Scheduled Co-operative Banks: Different banks like Commercial Banks, Regional Rural Banks and Scheduled Cooperative Banks are eligible to avail of refinance support from MUDRA for financing micro enterprise activities.
3.Women Enterprise programme: In order to encourage women entrepreneurs the financing banks / MFIs may consider extending additional facilities, including interest reduction on their loan. At present, MUDRA extends a reduction of 25bps in its interest rates to MFIs
/ NBFCs, who are providing loans to women entrepreneurs.
4.Securitization of loan portfolio: MUDRA also supports Banks / NBFCs / MFIs for raising funds for financing micro enterprises by participating in securitization of their loan assets against micro enterprise portfolio, by providing second loss default guarantee, for credit enhancement and also participating in investment of PassThrough Certificate (PTCs) either as Senior or Junior investor.
In addition to it, accreditation / rating of MFI entities is one of the roles earmarked for MUDRA. Hence all the given functions are performed by Mudra Bank.",Hint 138,1,3
"Which of the following statements is/are correct with regard to Gramin BhandaranYojana?1.It aims for creation of storage capacity by using traditional underground storage in the rural areas.2.Subsidy of one third of the capital cost will be provided in north-eastern states, hilly areas and to women farmers.3.The project will be implemented by the ministry of rural development.Select the correct answer using the code given below.",1 only,2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.The Main objectives ofGraminBhandaranYojana is creation of scientific storage capacity with allied facilities in rural areas to meet out various requirements of farmers for storing farm produce, processed farm produce, agricultural inputs, etc., and prevention of distress sale by creating the facility of pledge loan and marketing credit. Hence statement 1 is incorrect.
2.Subsidy of 33.33% of the capital cost of the project in case of projects located in North â€ Eastern States, hilly areas and those belonging to Women Farmers/ theirself help groups / co-operatives and SC/ST entrepreneurs & their self-help groups/ Co-operatives subject to a maximum ceiling on subsidy of Rs.62.50 lakh will be provided. No maximum ceiling on subsidy in the case of cooperatives assisted by NCDC. Hence statement 2 is correct.
3.The project would be implemented by Ministry of Agriculture. (Hence statement 3 is incorrect)",Hint 139,1,1
Consider the following statements:1.Reinsurance is the process whereby insurance cover is provided to the insurance companies.2.Foreign players are not allowed to setup reinsurance companies in India.3.General Insurance Corporation GIC) of India is the only reinsurance company in the public sector.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Statement 1 is correct: Reinsurance is a process whereby one entity (the reinsurer) takes on all or part of the risk covered under a policy issued by an insurance company in consideration of a premium payment. In other words, it is a form of an insurance cover for insurance companies.
2.Statement 2 is incorrect. Foreign players are allowed to setup reinsurance companies in India. Insurance Laws (Amendments) act, 2015 enables foreign reinsurers to set up branches in India.
3.For the development of insurance in an economy the presence of reinsurance companies is a precondition. It becomes an essential precondition if the economy is trying to develop and expand insurance with the active participation of the private sector insurance companies. This made the government convert the GIC into a re-insurance company in 2000- this is the sole re-insurer in India, that too in the public sector. Hence statement 3 is correct.",Hint 140,1,2
Which of the following  are  the  correctreasons that support the need for phasing out of subsidies in agriculture?1.Subsidies reduce the competitiveness in market.2.Subsidies encourage wasteful use of energy.3.Fertiliser subsidy has resulted inimpaired micronutrients in the soil at many places.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.More than the poor or marginal farmers, the rich farmers get the benefit of subsidy. This keeps them insulated against the competitive forces of the market and reduces the competition. Hence, 1st statement is correct.
2.Subsidies encourage wasteful use of resources such as excessive use of electricity, fertilisersetc without worrying about the cost of such usage. Hence, 2nd statement is correct.
3.Fertiliser subsidy such urea has led to excessive use of particular fertilisers, resulting in impaired micronutrients in the soil. Hence, 3rd statement is correct.",Hint 141,1,3
"With reference to the Negotiable Warehouse Receipts NWRs) in the context of agricultural market, consider the following statements:1.They are  documents  issued by warehouses to depositors against thecommodities deposited in the warehouses.2.Farmers can seek loans from banks against NWRs issued by the registered warehouses.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"1.Statement 1 is correct: Warehouse Receipts are documents issued by warehouses to depositors against the commodities deposited in the warehouses, for which the warehouse is thebailee.
2.Warehouse Receipts may be either non-negotiable or negotiable (means transferable by simple endorsement /signature). Negotiable warehouse receipts are transferred by endorsement and delivery; i.e., either the original depositor or the holder in due course (transferee) can claim the commodities from the warehouse. NWRs can be traded, sold, swapped and used as collateral to support borrowing.
3.In India, the term negotiable warehouse receipt is defined in Section 2(m) of the Warehousing (Development and Regulation) Act, 2007 (WDR Act), which came into force from 25 October 2010.
WDR Act provides for issuance of Negotiable Warehouse Receipts (NWRs) by the warehouses registered under this Act.
4.Statement 2 is correct: NWRs issued by registered warehouses help farmers to seek loans from banks against NWRs and this way NWRs become a prime tool of trade. NWRs provide farmers with an instrument that allows them to extend the sales period of modestly perishable products well beyond the harvesting season. Negotiable warehouse receipts allow transfer of ownership of that commodity stored in a warehouse without having to deliver the physical commodity. These receipts are issued in negotiable form, making them eligible as collateral for loans. It is also beneficial to other stakeholders, such as, banks, financial Institutions, insurance companies, trade, commodity exchanges as well as consumers.
NWRs can enhance banks interest in lending in respect of farm goods deposited by farmers in the registered warehouses which can increase liquidity in the rural areas and encourage scientific warehousing of goods.",Hint 142,1,1
Consider the following statements:1.FDI proposals of above Rs.5000 crore of inflow is considered by the Foreign Investment Promotion Board.2.Sectoral caps set by the government in various sectors apply to both direct and indirect foreign investments.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 and 2,2,"1.Statement 1 is not correct. The Minister of Finance who is in-charge of FIPB would consider the recommendations of FIPB on proposals with total foreign equity inflow of and below Rs.5000 crore. The recommendations of FIPB on proposals with total foreign equity inflow of more than Rs. 5000 crore would be placed for consideration of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA).
2.Statement 2 is correct. Sectoral cap i.e. the maximum amount which can be invested by foreign investors in an entity, unless provided otherwise, is composite and includes all types of foreign investments, direct and indirect, regardless of whether the said investments have been made under Schedule 1 (FDI), 2 (FII), 2A (FPI), 3 (NRI), 6 (FVCI), 9 (LLPs), 10 (DRs) and 11(Investment Vehicle) of FEMA (Transfer or Issue of Security by Persons Resident Outside India) Regulations.",Hint 143,1,2
"With reference to Kisan Vikas Patra, consider the following statements:1.It is a saving scheme to which only landless farmers can subscribe.2.It is issued by the Ministry of Agriculture.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,4,"1.KisanVikas Patra (KVP): a certificate savings scheme was launched by the Government on 1st April, 1988. The scheme provides facility of unlimited investment (minimum investment 100 rupees) by way of purchase of certificates from post offices in various denominations.KisanVikas Patra (KVP) is a very popular instrument among small savers, eligibility criteria to invest inKisanVikas Patra is possession of a post office account. (statement 1 is not correct).
2.The instrument encourages people, who may have banked and unbanked savings to invest. It is a financial service provided by the Department of Posts. (statement 2 is incorrect).",Hint 144,1,3
Which of the following statements regarding strategic disinvestment is/are correct?1.It refers to dilution of shareholding of a loss making Central Public Sector unit only2.It involves transfer of management control from government to private sector3.It is overlooked   by Department   of Investment and Public Asset ManagementSelect the correct answer using the codes given above.,1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Statement 1 is not correct. The disinvestment commission has defined strategic sale: Strategic disinvestment would imply the sale of substantial portion of the Government shareholding of a central public sector enterprise (CPSE) ofupto 50%, or such higher percentage as the competent authority may determine, along with transfer of management control(statement 2 is correct). The idea for strategic sale comes from the governments policy for a comprehensive approach for efficient management of Government investment in CPSEs
2.Statement 3 is correct. The DIPAM (earlier Dept. Of Divestment) works under Finance Ministry and deals with all the matters relating to management of central government investments in equity including disinvestment of equity in central public sector undertakings.",Hint 145,1,1
Which of the following are the advantages of Cheque Truncation System?1.Reduction in the additional cost of movement of physical cheques across banks.2.Faster clearing of cheques.3.No geographical restrictions on jurisdiction of banks.Select the correct answer using the codes given below.,1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"Cheque Truncation System (CTS) is a cheque clearing system undertaken by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) for faster clearing of cheques. As the name suggests, truncation is the process of stoppingthe flow of the physical cheque in its way of clearing. In its place an electronic image of the cheque is transmitted with key important data.
Following are the benefits of CTS:
1.Shorter clearing cycleand Superior verification and reconciliation process. (statement 2 correct)
2.No geographical restrictions as to jurisdiction on Operational efficiency for banks and customers. (statement 3 correct)
3.Reduction in operational risk and risks associated with paper clearing.
4.Reduction in additional cost of movement of physical cheques. (statement 1 correct)",Hint 146,1,2
"Withreferencetoeconomy,the term predatory pricing refers to:",the pricing of goods or services at such a low level that other firms cannot compete and are forced to leave the market.,the pricing of goods at high levels by a company exercising monopoly in the economy.,the practice of subsidizing goods in the economy by the government reducing private sector participation.,the pricing of goods and services at high levels during peak demand periods.,1,"1.Predatory pricing is the act of setting prices low in an attempt to eliminate the competition. Predatory pricing is illegal under anti-trust laws, as it makes markets more vulnerable to a monopoly. Companies may engage in a variety of activities that intend to drive out competitors, such as create barriers to entry for new competitors or unethical production methods to minimize costs.",Hint 147,1,3
"With reference to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development IBRD), consider the following statements:1.It was created to help rebuilding Europe after the World War II.2.It is part of the World Bank Group.3.It offers loans to both developed and developing countries.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"1.Statement 1 is correct: The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development was created in 1944 to help Europe rebuild after World War II.
2.Statement 2 is correct: IBRD is part of World Bank institution. It works closely with the rest of the World Bank Group to help developing countries reduce poverty, promote economic growth, and build prosperity.
3.Statement 3 is not correct:ï»¿IBRD provides loans and other assistance primarily to middle income developing countries.
4.In December, 2016, India Signed Grant Agreement with the IBRD for USD 5.19 million for Additional Financing for Financing Energy Efficiency at MSMEs Project- Programmatic Framework for Energy Efficiency.",Hint 148,1,1
"With reference to the National ScheduledCastes Finance and Development Corporation NSFDC), consider the following statements:1.Its objective is to provide financial assistance to persons belonging to scheduled castes living below Double the Poverty Line limit.2.It gives priority to women while disbursing loans and also has separate loan schemes for women belonging to scheduled caste.3.It works under the Ministry of Social justice and Empowerment.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.NSFDC stands for National Scheduled Castes Finance & Development Corporation. It was set up by the Government of India under Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment (MOSJ&E) under Section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 as a company not for profit.
2.It was established to finance for the economic empowerment of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes families living below Double the Poverty Line including their skill upgradation.
3.NSFDC provides loans only to economically poor sections of Scheduled Castes whose annual family income is below Double the Poverty Line limit (DPL).
4.It gives priority to women in loan schemes and there are three exclusive schemes for women beneficiaries i.e.MahilaSamriddhiYojana,MahilaKisanYojana andNariArthikSashaktikaranYojana.",Hint 149,1,2
Consider the following statements with respect to digital payment regulations in India :1.Ratan Watal Committee had recently recommended for establishing a separate Payments Regulatory Board.2.Currently digital payments are regulated by the RBI.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"1.RatanWatal Committee was tasked to review existing payment systems in the country and recommend appropriate measures for encouraging Digital Payments. It had representatives from Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI), tax department and various industry bodies in the payments space. It had called for establishing separate Payments Regulatory Board (PRB) an independent body for retail payments and suggested that RBIs regulation must be kept only for systemically important payment system. Hence statement 1 is correct.
2.However the RBI has opposed the recommendation of establishment of a separate entity to regulate payments. Currently digital payments are regulated by the RBI in India. Hence statement 2 is correct.",Hint 150,1,3
The World Bank recently decided to raise its global poverty line from $1.25 per day in Purchasing Power Parity or PPP terms) to $1.90. The World Bank estimates global poverty line by taking the average of,the national poverty lines of 15 of the world?s poorest countries,GNIPPP) of all the countries,The national poverty lines of all the countries,The GNIPPP) of 15 of the worlds poorest countries,1,"1.The World Bank essentially constructs its poverty line by taking the average of the national poverty lines of 15 of theworld?s poorest countries (chiefly sub-Saharan countries and Nepal since 2005) and then converts this average into an internationally comparable number. For this number, it takes a basket of goods and services and calculates how much it would cost to buy these in various countries.
2.The World Bank decided to update the prices in this basket to 2011 prices since incomes in these countries had risen, and that raised the poverty line - what was $1.25 at 2005 prices became $1.90 at 2011 prices.",Hint 151,1,1
A 45 year old man having saving bankaccount in SBI is eligible for availing which of the following schemes?1.PM Jeevan Jyoti Yojana2.PM Suraksha Bima Yojana3.Atal Pension YojanaSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.PradhanMantri SurakshaBimaYojana will provide insurance coverage of Rs.2 lakhs for individuals on payment of just Rs.12/- per annum. This scheme can benefit all the savings bank account holders in the age group of 18-70 years.
2.PradhanMantriJivanJyothiBimaYojana offers Life Insurance coverage of Rs.2 lakhs for any savings bank holders in the age group of 18- 50 years on payment of just Rs.330/- per year.
3.Atal PensionYojana focuses on the unorganized. It would provide a fixed minimum pension Rs.1000 to Rs.5000 per month starting from the age of 60. The amount of pension will depend on the monthly contribution by the employee and the age at which the employee subscribes the insurance. In any case the individual will have to subscribe under Atal PensionYojana for a minimum of 20 years. Age of joining can be between 18 and 40 years.",Hint 152,1,2
Which among the following best describes Bank Run?,It is a situation when there is excessive liquidity in the banks.,It is a condition when Non performing assets NPAs) of banks increased above the threshold limit.,It refers to providing banking services on doorstep through mobile van.,It is a situation when a large number of customers of a bank withdraw their deposits simultaneously.,4,"1.A bank run occurs when a large number of customers of a bank or another financial institution withdraw their deposits simultaneously due to concerns about the banks solvency.
2.As more people withdraw their funds, the probability of default increases, thereby prompting more people to withdraw their deposits.
3.In extreme cases, the banks reserves may not be sufficient to cover the withdrawals.",Hint 153,1,3
Consider the following about Unstructured Supplementary Service Data (USSD) that is being utilized by many corporations in India for service delivery.1. Use of USSD is limited due to its requirement of high speed internet.2. It can be used for serving the banking needs of customers.Which of the above is/are correct?,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,None,2,"Justification: USSD is a GSM based technology i.e. used to send text between a mobile phone and an application program in the network. Unlike Short Message Service (SMS) messages, USSD messages create a real-time connection during a USSD session. So they are more responsive than services that use SMS.
Statement 1: So, it can be used even without any internet connection as it does not require any data. 1 will be wrong.
Statement 2: The Union Bank of India (UBI) has recently launched an Unstructured Supplementary Service Data (USSD) based *99# mobile application for their customers for basic banking needs.",Hint 154,1,1
Non-performing Assets (NPAs) are loans made by a bank or finance company on which repayments or interest payments are not being made on time. How do high NPAs affect the citizens (customers) in India?1. They may lead to an increase in the cost of capital for borrowers.2. They may lead to bank defaults and thus lower peoples confidence in the banking system affecting their savings ratio.Which of the above is/are correct?,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,None,3,"Justification: Statement 1: It results in inflating the cost of capital for economic activities and banks may charge higher interest rates on some products to compensate NPAs.
NPA is any asset of a bank which is not producing any income. It affects the profitability & liquidity of the banks.
Statement 2: It adversely affects the value of bank in terms of market credit and widens assets and liability mismatch. This may even lead to bank defaults.
It shakes consumers confidence in the banking deposits, and forces them to withdraw savings in banks, thus lowering the savings ratio.
Learning: Savings ratio is the total amount of a persons income not spent on consumption and invested in either bank deposits, bonds or other market instruments.
In any economy, savings finance investments. Higher savings increase liquidity in the market and reduce the cost of credit resulting in higher economic growth.",Hint 155,1,2
Which of the following do not have an intrinsic value?1.Fiat Money2.Gold or Silver coinWhich of the statement(s) given above is/are correct?,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"The intrinsic value is the actual value of a company or an asset based on an underlying perception of its true value including all aspects of the business, in terms of both tangible and intangible factors.
Fiat money is currency that a government has declared to be legal tender, but it is not backed by a physical commodity. The value of fiat money is derived from the relationship between supply and demand rather than the value of the material that the money is made of.
Historically, most currencies were based on physical commodities such as gold or silver, but fiat money is based solely on the faith and credit of the economy.
Most modern paper currencies are fiat currencies; they have no intrinsic value and are used solely as a means of payment.",Hint 156,1,3
"With reference to the Price Deficiency Payment, consider the following statements:1.It is offered when the Minimum Support Price is below the mandi price.2.The mechanism entails paying the benefit directly to the affected farmers.Which of the statement(s) given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"Statement 1 is incorrect. Under the Price Deficiency Payment system if the price in an Agriculture Produce Market Committee (APMC)mandi fall below the MSP (Minimum support Price) then the farmer would be entitled to a maximum of, say, 50 per cent of the difference between the MSP and the market price.
Statement 2 is correct. The mechanism entails paying the benefit directly to the affected farmers. For instance, if a farmer sells maize at Rs 900 per quintal against the MSP of Rs 1,325 per quintal, the deficiency of Rs 425 per quintal should be directly transferred to the bank account of the concerned farmer according to the authentic documents which he possesses to claim the benefit.
Such a system would keep the quantum of the subsidy bill in check and also be consistent with Indias obligations to the WTO.",Hint 157,1,1
Match the following sets of pair.ConceptDefinitions1. Deflation A. Reduction in the rate of inflation2. DisinflationB. General fall in the level of prices3. StagflationC. Combination of inflation and rising unemployment due to recession.4. Reflation D. Attempt to raise the prices to counteract the deflationary prices.Select the correct answer using the codes given below.,"1-A, 2-B, 3-C, 4-D","1-B, 2-A, 3-C, 4-D","1-B, 2-A, 3-D, 4-C","1-A, 2-B, 3-D, 4-C",2,"Deflation: It is a contraction in the supply of circulated money within an economy, and therefore the opposite of inflation. In times of deflation, the purchasing power of currency and wages are higher than they otherwise would have been. This is distinct from but similar to price deflation, which is a general decrease in the price level, though the two terms are often mistaken for each other and used interchangeably.
Disinflation: is a slowing in the rate of inflation. It is used to describe instances when the inflation rate has reduced marginally over the short term. Although it is used to describe periods of slowing inflation, disinflation should not be confused with deflation, which can be harmful to the economy.
Stagflation: A condition of slow economic growth and relatively high unemployment – economic stagnation – accompanied by rising prices, or inflation, or inflation and a decline in Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Stagflation is an economic problem defined in equal parts by its rarity and by the lack of consensus among academics on how exactly it comes to pass.
Reflation: A fiscal or monetary policy, designed to expand a countrys output and curb the effects of deflation. Reflation policies can include reducing taxes, changing the money supply and lowering interest rates.
The term reflation is also used to describe the first phase of economic recovery after a period of contraction.",Hint 158,1,2
The Reserve Bank of India often uses the method of sterilisation in order,To neutralise the fresh money that enters the system.,To eliminate unaccounted income,To increase the price of government bonds,To reduce Non-Performing Assets in commercial banks.,1,"Sterilisation refers to the process by which the RBI takes away money from the banking system to neutralise the fresh money that enters the system.
Suppose the RBI decides to buy US dollars (USD) from the market. Now, the money held by the RBI does not form part of the banking system. So, if the RBI releases rupees from its coffers to buy dollars, the money supply in the banking system increases. That can be a problem.
If the volume of goods and services Produced in the economy remains unchanged, the extra money will lead to increase in prices of all commodities.
More money in the banking system means higher bond prices because banks will have more money, they will buy more bonds. And that will push up bond price s. Since bonds carry an inverse price -yield relationship, higher bond prices mean lower yields.
The problem is that lower yields will force the RBI to cut interest rates further.
If the RBI does not want to cut rates, it will reduce (sterilize) liquidity that causes the yields to fall. It will do so by selling the government bonds that it holds in its books. This means that sterilization is possible only to the extent that the RBI holds government bonds in its portfolio.
This process of selling government bonds to reduce liquidity is part of its open market operations.",Hint 159,1,3
The Financial Stability Report (FSR) is released by:,Reserve Bank of India,Ministry of Finance,Ministry of Commerce and Industry (India),None of the above.,1,"The Reserve Bank of India releases the Financial Stability Report (FSR), a biannual publication.
The FSR reflects the overall assessment on the stability of Indias financial system and its resilience to risks emanating from global and domestic factors. Besides, the Report also discusses issues relating to development and regulation of the financial sector. Beginning from June 2015 issue, a special thematic discussion is included in the FSRs brought out in June. Accordingly, this issue of FSR brings out a thematic discussion on An optimal configuration for the financial system-BanksversusMarket in the context of the progress towards making the Indian financial system more effective in supporting the economic growth.",Hint 160,1,1
"With reference to the Indian Banking sector, which of the following activity/activities is/are carried out by both commercial bank and Non-Banking Financial Company (NBFC)?1.Accepting demand deposits.2.Issuing cheques drawn on itself.3.Lending money.Select the correct answer using the codes given below:",2 and 3 only,3 only,1 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"NBFCs lend and make investments and hence their activities are akin to that of banks; however, there are a few differences as given below: 1)NBFC cannot accept demand deposits;
2)NBFCs do not form part of the payment and settlement system and cannot issue cheques drawn on itself; and 3)Deposit insurance facility of Deposit
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation is not available to depositors of NBFCs, unlike in case of banks. Knowledge Base
ANon-Banking Financial Company (NBFC) is a company registered under the Companies Act, 1956 engaged in the business of loans and advances, acquisition of shares/stocks/bonds/debentures/securitie s issued by Government or local authority or other marketable securities of a like nature, leasing, hire -purchase, insurance business, chit business but does not include any institution whose principal business is that of agriculture activity, industrial activity, purchase or sale of any goods (other than securities) or providing
Anon-banking institution which is a company and has principal business of receiving deposits under any scheme or arrangement in one lump sum or ininstallments by way of contributions or in any other manner, is also a non-banking financial company (Residuary non- banking company).",Hint 161,1,2
"With reference to Indian Money Market and Capital Market, which of the following is incorrect?",Collateral security is required to borrow from the money market while it is not required in the Capital Market.,Money Market is informal while capital market is formal nature and structure.,Risk factor is low in money market while risk factor is comparatively high in capital market.,Money market increases liquidity of funds in the economy while the capital market mobilizes savings in the economy.,1,"Collateral security may or may not require to borrow money from the Money market as well as from the Capital Market. Knowledge Base
There are two kinds of markets where borrowing and lending of money takes place between fund scarce and fund surplus individuals and groups. The markets catering the need of short term funds are called Money Markets while the markets that cater to the need of long term funds are called Capital Markets.
Structure & Functions of Money Market in India There are two kinds of markets where borrowing and lending of money takes place between fund scarce and fund surplus individuals and groups. The markets catering the need of short term funds are called Money Markets while the markets that cater to the need of long term funds are called Capital Markets. Thus, Money Markets is that segment of financial markets where borrowing and lending of the short-term funds takes place. Thematurity of the money market instruments is one day to one year. In our country, Money Markets are regulated by both RBI and SEBI.",Hint 162,1,3
The price of any currency in international market is decided by the1.Demand for goods/services provided by the country concerned.2.Stability of the government of the concerned country.3.World Bank4.Economic potential of the country in question.Select the correct answer using the codes given below:,"1, 2 and 3 only",3 and 4 only,1 and 2 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",3,World Bank provides financial help for development projects. It has nothing to do with the price of any currency. Economic potential of the country in question is a long-term factor that may affect the flow of capital butit will not affect price of thecurrency which is a short- term phenomenon.,Hint 163,1,1
Which of the following is the characteristic of Round Tripping?,It is an arrangement where a property is transferred to a person located overseas without compliance with tax regime.,It is a practice whereby a company deliberately incorporates a business unit in a tax haven to reinvest in the parent country.,When a property which has purchased in the name of some person other than the person who has financed it and subsequently transfer to a third person.,None of the above.,2,"Round Tripping denotes a trip where a person or thing returns to the place from where the journey began. In the context of black money, it leaves the country through various channels such as inflated invoices, payments to shell companies overseas, thehawala route and so on. After cooling its heels overseas for a while, this money returns in a freshly laundered form; thus, completing a round-trip.",Hint 164,1,2
Which one of the following groups of items is included in Indias foreign exchange reserves?,"Foreign currency assets, gold holdings of the RBI and loans from the World Bank.","Foreign-currency assets, Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) and loans from foreign countries.","Foreign-currency assets, loans from the World Bank and SDRs.","Foreign-currency assets, gold holdings of the RBI and SDRs.",4,"Forex reserves are foreign currency assets held by the central banks of countries.
These assets include foreign marketable securities, monetary gold, special drawing rights (SDRs) and reserve position in the IMF. The main purpose of holding foreign exchange reserves is to make international payments and hedge against exchange rate risks.",Hint 165,1,3
"With reference to the Minimum Alternative Tax (MAT), consider the following statements:1.It is calculated on the profit shown in the Profit and Loss Account of the company.2.It aims to make those companies pay at least some tax which were paying little or no tax.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"Both the statements are correct.
Companies find various loop-holes to avoid paying income tax by using several exemptions. MAT is way of making companies pay a minimum amount of tax. MAT is calculated at 18.5 per cent on the book profit (the profit shown in the profit and loss account) or at the usual corporate rates, and whichever is higher is payable as tax.",Hint 166,1,1
"With reference to the Security Market, consider the following statements:1.The primary market is the place where the purchasers buy the shares from other shareholders instead of the company themselves.2.The secondary market is the place where the new public offers are launched by the companies.3.Underwriting groups such as the investment banks function in the primary market.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",2 and 3 only,1 only,1 and 3 only,3 only,4,"Statement 1 is incorrect. The primary market provides the channel for sale of new securities. Primary market provides opportunity to issuers of securities both Government as well as corporate, to raise resources to meet their requirements of investment and/or discharge some obligations. They may issue the securities at face value, or at a discount/premium and these securities may take a variety ofform s such as equity, debt etc. They may issue the securities in domestic market and/or international market.
Statement 2 is incorrect. Secondary market refers to a market where securities are traded after being initially offered to the public in the primary market and/or listed on the Stock Exchange. Majority of the trading is done in the secondary market. Secondary market comprises of equity markets and the debt markets.
Statement 3 is correct. An investment bank (IB) is a financial intermediary that performs a variety of services. Investment banks specialize in large and complex financial transactions such as underwriting, acting as an intermediary between a securities issuer and the investing public, facilitating mergers and other corporate reorganizations, and acting as a broker and/or financial adviser for institutional clients.
Major investment banks include Barclays,BofA Merrill Lynch,Warburgs, Goldman Sachs, Deutsche Bank, JP Morgan, Morgan Stanley, Salomon Brothers, UBS, Credit Suisse, Citibank and Lazard. Some investment banks specialize inparticular industry sectors. Many investment banks also have retail operations that serve small, individual customers.",Hint 167,1,2
General Anti-Avoidance Rules (GAAR) are meant for,Extending tax deduction at source (TDS) system to all private sector employees to check avoidance.,Denying tax benefits to a business entity if it carries out a transaction exclusively for avoiding tax.,Make avoidance of corporation tax by business entities a criminal offence.,Reducing circulation of black money on which tax can be avoided.,2,"GAAR refers to General Anti -Avoidance Rules. These rules target any transaction or business arrangement that is entered into with the objective of avoiding tax. The objective is to check aggressive tax planning.
Avoidance means an attempt to reduce tax liability through legal means, i.e. to regulate your affairs in such a way that you pay the minimum tax imposed by the Act as opposed to the maximum. For example,
Suresh makes a company XYZ to sell some product. The company XYZ pays 25% tax, but if Suresh himself sold the products he would pay 30%. Suresh has formed the company only to save 5% tax.",Hint 168,1,3
"With reference to the currency market, the term Convertibility is used to denote1.Freedom to exchange currencies like commodities across the counter.2.Freedom to invest globally.3.Freedom to residents to remit outside the country.Select the correct answer using the codes given below.",1 only,1 and 3 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"Currency convertibility is the ease with which a countrys currency can be converted into gold or another currency. Convertibility is extremely important for international commerce. When a currency in inconvertible, it poses a risk and barrier to trade with foreigners who have no need for the domestic currency.
Freely convertible currencies have immediate value on the foreign exchange market, and few restrictions on themanne r and amount that can be traded for another currency. Free convertibility is a major feature of a hard currency",Hint 169,1,1
"With reference to the Prime Lending Rate (PLR), which of the following is correct?",PLR is the rate at which bank lends to the industries.,PLR is the rate at which banks lends to the farmers.,PLR is the rate at which banks lends to the governments.,PLR is the rate at which banks lends to the best customers.,4,"Prime Lending Rate is the interest rate charged by banks to their largest, most secure, and most creditworthy customers on short- term loans. This rate is used as a guide for computing interest rates for other borrowers.
In order to make the credit market more transparent and ensurethatbanks pass on the lower cost of fund automatically to existing customers, RBI replaced the existing system of prime lending rate (PLR) to a new base rate, which will be fixed on the basis of cost of funds.
Base rate is the minimum rate set by the Reserve Bank of India below which banks are not allowed to lend to its customers.
Base rate is decided in order to enhance transparency in the credit market and ensure that banks pass on the lower cost of fund to their customers. Loan pricing will be done by adding base rate and a suitable spread depending on the credit risk premium",Hint 170,1,2
Which of the following statements with reference to Liquidity Trap is/are incorrect?1.When injections of cash into the private banking system by a central bank fail to increase interest rates2.When fluctuations in the money supply that fail to translate into fluctuations in price levels.Select the correct answer using the code given below:,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"Statement 1 is incorrect- A liquidity trap is a situation, described in Keynesian Economics, in which injections of cash into the private banking system by a central bank fail to decrease interest rates and hence make monetary policy ineffective. A liquidity trap is causedwhe n people hoard cash because the y expect an adverse event such as deflation, insufficient aggregate demand, or war.
Statement 2 is correct- Common characteristics of a liquidity trap are interest rates that are close to zero andfluctuations in the money supply that fail to translate into fluctuations in price levels.",Hint 171,1,3
"Consider the following statements:1.Statutory liquidity Ratio is determined by RBI, maintained by banks itself in order to control the expansion of bank credit.2.Cash Reserve Ratio is determined and maintained by RBI, in order to control over to bank credit.Which of the statement(s) given above is/are correct?",1only,2 only,Both 1and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"Statement 1 is correct. Statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) is the Indian government term for reserve requirement that the commercial banks in India require to maintain in the form of gold, government approved securities before providing credit to the customers. Statutory Liquidity Ratiois determined by Reserve Bank of India maintained by banks in order to control the expansion of bank credit.
Statement 2 is correct. Cash Reserve Ratio is a central bank regulation which sets the minimum amount of reserves that must be held by a commercial bank. The amount of required minimum reserves is generally determined by the central bank as being equal to no less than a specified percentage or fraction of the amount of deposit liabilities that the commercial bank owes to its customers.
The commercial banks reserves normally consist of cash owned by the bank and stored physically in the bank vault (vault cash), plus the amount of the commercial banks balance in that banks account with the central bank.",Hint 172,1,1
"Consider the following statements regarding the Liquidity Adjustment facility (LAF):1.It was introduced by RBI and all Schedule Commercial Banks are eligible to bid.2.Funds under LAF are used by the banks for their day to day mismatches in the liquidity.3.LAF covers credit at repo, reverse repo and MSF rate.Which of the above statement(s) is/are correct?",1 and 3 only,2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"Statement 1 is incorrect. All the Scheduled Commercial Banks are eligible to participate in auctions except the Regional Rural Banks. Liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) is a monetary policy to which allows banksborrow money through repurchase agreements.
Statement 3 is incorrect. LAF covers credit at repo and reverse repo rate only.",Hint 173,1,2
"Measure of Money supply-M1, includes1.Currency with public2.Demand deposit in all banks (e.g. current account, savings account)3.Other deposits with RBI4.Indias deposits with IMF, World bank, Foreign Government etc.5.Interbank depositsWhich of the statements given above is/are correct?","1, 2 and 3 only",1 and 2 only,"3, 4 and 5 only","1, 2, 3, 4 and 5",1,"M1 is a metric for the money supply ofacountry and includes physical money i.e. both paper and coin. It also includes checking accounts, demand deposits and negotiable order of withdrawal (NOW) accounts.
1.The most liquid portions of the money supply are measured by M1 because it contains currency and assets that can be converted to cash quickly.",Hint 174,1,3
"Recently India and Switzerland have signed a Joint Declaration for implementation of Automatic Exchange of Information (AEOI) in respect of accounts of Indians held abroad. With reference to the Multilateral Automatic Exchange of Financial Account Information, consider the following statements:1.This pact is based on the Basel agreement.2.It aims to help member countries to curb tax evasions and deal with the problem of black money.3.It obliges signatories to exchange a wide range of financial information among themselves periodically.Select the correct answer using the code given below.",1 and 3 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"Statement 1 is incorrect.
MCAA is multilateral convention on administrative assistance in taxation matters, developed by the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). It was signed by 53 jurisdictions in July 2015 based on Article 6 of the Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters. India had joined it in June 2015.
Statement 2 and 3 are correct.
It sets up a system wherein bulk taxpayer information will be periodically be sent by source country of income to the country of residence of the taxpayer. This agreement obliges signatories to exchange a wide range of financial information among them periodically and automatically.
Its main aim is to prevent international tax evasions and avoidance and help member countries to curb tax evasion and deal with the problem of black money.",Hint 175,1,1
The RBI implements monetary policy through which of the following instruments?1.Bank rate manipulation2.Open Market Operation3.Reserve requirement changes4.Moral suasionSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 2 and 4 only",2 and 3,"1, 2, 3 and 4",4,"Instruments of Monetary policy
These instruments are used to control the money flow in the economy, stated following;
1. Open Market Operations
An open market operation is an instrument of monetary policy which involves buying or selling of government securities from or to the public and banks.
2. Cash Reserve Ratio
Cash Reserve Ratio is a certain percentage of bank deposits which banks are required to keep with RBI in the form of reserves or balances.
3. Statutory Liquidity Ratio
Every financial institution has to maintain a certain quantity of liquid assets with themselves at any point of time of their total time and demand liabilities.
4. Bank Rate Policy
The bank rate, also known as the discount rate, is the rate of interest charged by the RBI for providing funds or loans to the banking system.
5. Credit Ceiling
In this operation, RBI issues, prior information or direction that loans to the commercial banks will be given up to a certain limit. In this case, commercial bank will be tight in advancing loans to the public.
6. Credit Authorization Scheme
Under this instrument of credit regulation RBI as per the guidelines authorizes the banks to advance loans to desired sectors.
7. Moral Suasion
Moral Suasion is just as a request by the RBI to the commercial banks to take so and so action and measures in so and so trend of the economy.
8. Repo Rate and Reverse Repo Rate
Repo rate is the rate at which RBI lends to its clients generally against government securities. Reverse Repo rate is the rate at which RBI borrows money from the commercial banks. The increase in the Repo rate will increase the cost of borrowing and lending of the banks which will discourage the public to borrow money and will encourage them to deposit. As the rates are high the availability of credit and demand decreases resulting to decrease ininflation . This increase in Repo Rate and Reverse Repo Rate is a symbol of tightening of the policy.",Hint 176,1,2
Total liability of the monetary authority of the country is referred to as,Narrow Money,Broad Money,High Powered Money,Dear Currency,3,This is a very simple question and directly quoted in the Money and Banking chapter of 12th Standard Macroeconomics. It is also termed as Monetary Base,Hint 177,1,3
Consider the following statements about the Ad Valorem Tax:1.It is a direct tax imposed on the value of commodity.2.Both GST and VAT are examples of Ad Valorem Tax.Select the correct statement using the codes given below:,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"Ad Valorem Tax is an Indirect tax not direct tax, imposed on the value of commodity. GST & VAT is an example of Ad Valorem Tax. Knowledge Base
An ad valorem tax is a tax whose amount is based on the value of a transaction or of property. It is typically imposed at the time of a transaction, as in the case of a sales tax or value-added tax (VAT). An ad valorem tax may also be imposed annually, as in the case of a real or personal property tax, or in connection with another significant event (e.g.
Prelims 2017 Test Series Economy L1 – Explanationsinheritance tax, expatriation tax, or tariff). In some countries, a stamp duty is imposed as an ad valorem tax.",Hint 178,1,1
The concept of Universal Banking implies,Providing banking facilities to all people,Enabling basic banking services in rural areas,Merging banks to create large banks with universal presence,Providing all banking products under one roof,4,"Universal Banking means providing all banking and related services under one roof.
A universal bank participates in many kinds of banking activities and is both a commercial bank and an investment bank as well as providing other financial services such as insurance.
Mentor Note: This term has been in news, and as aspirants, it is expected not to miss these questions.",Hint 179,1,2
"With reference to taxation in India, consider the following statements1.A tax is collected for utilization for a specific purpose whereas a cess is collected for a generic purpose.2.A tax is collected for a generic purpose, while a cess is collected for a specific propose3.Unlike taxes, cess is not a part of the divisible pool that is shared with the state governments.4.Collections from a cess are usually kept outside the Consolidated fund of India whereas all taxes go into the Consolidated fund of India.Select the correct statement(s) using the codes given below:",2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 3 and 4","2, 3 and 4",4,"Cess is a tax on tax, levied by thegovt for a specific purpose. Generally, cess is expected to be levied till the time thegovt gets enough money for that purpose. The education cess, for example, is meant to finance basic education in the country.
The collections from Cess are not divided between the states, and they do notgoto consolidated fund. This has been a major complaint of the states on the issue of cess.
Option 2, 3 and 4 are also correct. Hence answer is option D.",Hint 180,1,3
"With reference to the Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds (FCCBs), consider the following statements:1.These are convertible debentures.2.These are issued through foreign institutional investors (FII)s.Select the correct answer using the codes given below:",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"A foreign currency convertible bond (FCCB) is a type of corporate bond issued by an Indian listed company in an overseas market and hence, in a currency different from that of the issuer. The highlight of the FCCB, however, is the option of converting the bonds into equity at a price determined at the time the bond is issued.
It also has the benefits of a debt instrument as it includes guaranteed returns or yields which are payable in foreign currency.",Hint 181,1,1
What is debt trap?,A situation when an economy borrows money to repay past borrowings.,A situation when an economy is borrowing more than its repaying of its past borrowing.,A situation when an economy is borrowing to repay even the interest of its past borrowings.,None of the above,3,"A situation in which a debt is difficult or impossible to repay, typically because high interest payments prevent repayment of the principal.",Hint 182,1,2
Which of the following is not a money market instrument?,Treasury bill,Certificate of deposits,Commercial bill,Government securities (G-Sec),4,"List of Money market Instruments:
1.Call money 2.Treasury bill 3.Cash management bills
4.Certificates of deposit 5.Repos
6.Commercial bill
Government securities (G-Sec) are an instrument for capital market.",Hint 183,1,3
"With reference to Small banks in India, consider the following statements:1.Small bank can lend to big corporate.2.It cannot set up subsidiaries to undertake non-banking financial services activities.3.It can be a Business Correspondent (BC) of any bank.Which of the above statement(s) is/are correct?",2 and 3 only,2 only,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"Statement 1 is incorrect. Small Banks can lend to small business units, small and marginal farmers, micro and small industries and unorganized sector entities but cant lend to big corporate.
Statement 3 is incorrect. Knowledge base
Small Banks: What small banks can do?
1. Take small deposits and disburse loans.
2. Distribute mutual funds, insurance products and other simple third-party financial products. 3.Lend 75% of their total adjusted net bank credit to priority sector.
4.Maximum loan size would be 10% of capital funds to single borrower, 15% to a group. 5.Minimum 50% of loans should be up to
25 lakhs.
What small banks cannot do? 1.Lend to big corporate and groups.
2. Other financial activities of the promoter must not mingle with the bank.
3. It cannot set up subsidiaries to undertake non-banking financial services activities. 4.Cannot be a business correspondent of any bank.",Hint 184,1,1
Which of the following policies aims to reduce the Current Account Deficit (CAD)?1.Reducing import duties2.Currency devaluation3.Providing export subsidies4.Tightening of fiscal and monetary policySelect the correct answer using the codes given below.,1 and 4 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 2, 3 and 4",2,"Reducing import duties will facilitate more imports widening the Current Account Deficit. Hence, policy (1) will not be able to address concerns of current account deficit.
A current account surplus indicates that the value of a countrys net foreign assets (i.e. assets less liabilities) grew over the period in question, and a current account deficit indicates that it shrank. Both government and private payments are included in the calculation. It iscalle d the current account because goods and services are generally consumed in the current period.",Hint 185,1,2
The term Shadow Banking refers to,Banking facilities mainly aimed to provide financial inclusion.,Opening new branches in un-banked areas.,Banking organizations that function like bank but outside the banking regulations.,Providing banking facilities to persons serving in the armed forces.,3,A Shadow Banking system refers to the financial intermediaries involved in facilitating the creation of credit across the global financial system but whose members are not subject to regulatory oversight. The shadow banking system also refers to unregulated activities by regulated institutions.,Hint 186,1,3
For a Giffen good,Income effect is positive and substitution effect is negative,Income effect is negative and substitution effect is positive,Income effect and substitution effect both are positive,Income effect and substitution effect both are negative,1,"AGiffen good: A good where higher price causes an increase in demand (reversing the usual law of demand). The increase in demand is due to the income effect of the higher price outweighing the substitution effect.
The concept of agiffen good is limited to very poor communities with a very limited choice of goods. Empirical evidence is hard to find, though some economists thought it applied to the Victorian poor who had very limited diet.
The idea is that if you are very poor and the price of your basic foodstuff (e.g bread) increases, then you cant afford the more expensive alternative food (meat) therefore, you end up buying more bread because it is the only thing you can afford.",Hint 187,1,1
"With reference to `Green Masala Bonds, sometimes seen in the news, which of the following feature(s) distinguish them from usual Masala Bonds?1.It is allowed to be denominated in the currency of the country where they are issued.2.It can also be issued to the customers in domestic country.Select the correct answer using the codes given below:",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,4,"Statement 1 is incorrect. These are rupee-denominated bonds issued to overseas buyers.
Statement 2 is incorrect. These are bonds issued outside India and denominated in Indian Rupees. They never issued to the customers in domestic country. As it is rupee denominated bond, there prime purpose is to issued outside the India.
Knowledge base:
Masala bonds: These are bonds issued outside India but denominated in Indian Rupees. The term was used by IFC (International Finance Corporation) to evoke the culture and cuisine of India. Unlike dollar bonds, where the borrower takes the currency risk, masala bond makes the investors bear the risk.
Green Masala bond: These are rupee - denominated bonds issued to overseas buyers, with their green versions aimed at renewable energy projects in India.
In August 2015, IFC (International Finance Corporation) became first entity to issue a Green Masala bond on the London Stock Exchange.",Hint 188,1,2
"With reference to the functions of RBI, which of the following is/are correct?1.It acts as a banker to the commercial banks.2.It acts as a banker to the government of India.3.It is responsible for the issue of the currency notes and the coins in the economy.4.It helps in sterilisation of economy against the external shocks.5.It is the controller of credit supply in an economy.Select the correct answer using the codes given below.","1,4 and 5 only","1,3,4 and 5 only","1,2,4 and 5 only","1, 2, 3, 4 and 5",3,"All the statements are correct except the third one as RBI is responsible for the issue of only currency notes whereas the coins are issued by the government.
Note- Refer NCERT on macroeconomics; Chapter  money and banking",Hint 189,1,3
Consider the following statements regarding the currency notes and coins issued in India.1.They are a legal tender i.e. they cannot be refused by any citizen of the country for settling any transaction.2.They are a fiat currency i.e. they derive their value from the guarantee provided on them by the issuing authority and have no intrinsic value.Which of the above statement(s) is/are correct?,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"They are a Fiat currency i.e. they derive their value from the guarantee provided on them by the issuing authority and have no intrinsic value. The currency notes for example have a promise of the governor of RBI that if someone produces the note to the RBI, or any other commercial bank, RBI will be responsible for giving the person purchasing power equal to the value printed on the note.
They are a legal tender i.e. they cannot be refused by any citizen of the country for settling any transaction. The same is, however, not true for settling the transaction with a Cheque.",Hint 190,1,1
"With reference to the Investment Funds, consider the following statements.1.National Investment Fund (NIF) receives disinvestment proceeds of central Public Sector Enterprises (PSE)2.Earning of NIF Will be used for central and state social welfare schemes3.National Investment and Infrastructure Fund (NIIF) enhance the infrastructure development solely in brownfield projects.4.NIIF invest in the corpus created by Asset Management Companies (AMC)Which of the statement(s) given above is/are correct?",1 and 4 only,"2, 3 and 4 only",1 and 3 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",1,"Statement 1 is correct. The Purpose of the fund was to receive disinvestment proceeds of central public sector enterprises and to invest the same to generate earnings without depleting the corpus.
Statement 2 is incorrect. The earnings of the Fund were to be used for selected Central social welfare Schemes only. This fund was kept outside the consolidated fund of India.
Statement 3 is incorrect. The objective of NIIF would be to maximize economic impact mainly through infrastructure development in commercially viable projects, both Greenfield and brownfield, including stalled projects. It could also consider other nationally important projects, for example, in manufacturing, if commercially viable.
Statement 4 is correct. One of the functions of NIIF is investing in the corpus created by Asset Management Companies (AMCs) for investing in private equity.",Hint 191,1,2
Which of the following is/are measures to address the deficit in Balance of Trade (BoT) of India?1.Licensing imports2.Income Tax concessions given to exporters3.Setting up of export processing zones4.Devaluation of rupeeSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 3 and 4 only",3 and 4 only,1 and 2 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",4,"All are among the measures suggested to address the deficit in Balance of Trade (BoT) of India.
Licensingimports:An import license is a document issued by the central government authorizing the importation of certain goods into its territory. It aims to reduce the import of non-essential items like cosmetics, sanitary goods etc. However, imports of essentialgoods like raw materials, machinery can be checked.
Income Tax concessions given to exporters: Special incentives in theform of concessions on tax can be provided to exporters. It will increase export.
Setting up of Export Processing Zones: Procedure of Setting up EPZ Unit in India includes a wide spectrum of policies and formalities which every export processing zones have to undergo while setting up any industrial unit in the particular zone.
It also ensures a number of benefits to the industrial units established within that zone. Devaluation of rupee: Devolution ofcurrency was taken up in 1991 to promote exports.
Devaluation means official lowering of the value of a countrys currency withinafixed exchange rate system, by which the monetary authority formally sets a new fixed rate with respect to a foreign reference currency.",Hint 192,1,3
Which of the following can be held true if a government incurs a revenue deficit?1.It means that the government is low on savings.2.Government may have to borrow not only for investment but also for its committed consumption expenditure.3.The government may have to reduceits capital expenditure/welfare expenditure.Select the correct answer using the codes given below.,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,All of the situation can occur when a government faces revenue deficit.,Hint 193,1,1
"With reference to deficit financing by the government, consider the following statements.1.It can be done by external aids, grants, borrowings and printing money.2.Deficit financing would result in decrease of public debtWhich of the following statements is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"Statement 1 is correct. A deficit financing means one is spending beyond means. Deficit financing can be done by external aid, grants, borrowing and printing money.
Statement 2 is incorrect. All these above-mentioned means will lead to extra supply of money in the economy, which will have the risk of inducing inflation. Deficit financed by borrowing would results into increase in public debt.",Hint 194,1,2
"Reserve Bank of India decides the SLR rate. However, most banks currently maintain a higher SLR rate than required because",Lack of credible lending options,To make higher profit on interest rate,To control the inflation in the Indian Market,Incomplete KYC norms of most of the Account holders,1,"Statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) is the Indian government term for reserve requirement that the commercial banks in India require to maintain in the form of gold, government approved securities before providing credit to the customers.
Statutory Liquidity Ratio is determined by Reserve Bank of India maintained by banks in order to control the expansion of bank credit.
SLR is used by bankers and indicates the minimum percentage of deposits that the bank has to maintain in form of gold, cash or other approved securities. Thus, we can say that it is ratio of cash and some other approved liability (deposits). It regulates the credit growth in India.",Hint 195,1,3
"In case of Rupee depreciation what can happen to corporate borrowings of an Indian firm in foreign currency?1.The debt service liability will decrease.2.The volume of debt would fall in local currency.3.If the borrower participates in export market, it can create a natural hedge against depreciation.Select the correct answer using the code given below.",1 and 2 only,3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"Statement 1 is incorrect. Rupee depreciation will increase the debt service liability since more domestic currency is required to buy the same amount of foreign exchange.
Statement 2 is incorrect. The volume of debt would rise in local currency terms. This is known as Debt overhang.
Statement 3 is correct. In case of export market, export receivables can offset to some extent the currency risk in debt payments.",Hint 196,1,1
The inflationary impact of the inflow of foreign capital in India is neutralized by the Reserve Bank of India by which one of the following methods?,Permitting outflow of foreign exchange,Sale of securities in the open market,Facilitating imports of essential commodities,Permitting depreciation of Indian rupee in the foreign exchange market,2,"If there is inflow of foreign capital in India, but simultaneously goods and services are not get produced. Then, inflation would get increase because of lack of supply. So, to tackle this problem RBI used to sale securities in the open market to suck money from the market. It reduces the inflation.",Hint 197,1,2
Which of the following shadow bank(s) is/are regulated under the SEBI?1.Merchant banking companies2.Venture capital fund companies3.Insurance companies4.Nidhi Companies5.Chit fundsSelect the correct answer using the codes given below:,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 4 only",2 and 5 only,"1, 2, 3, 4 and 5",1,"Shadow Banks: The organizations that function like banks, but outside the banking regulation.
American examples like hedge funds, securitization companies, Special Investment Vehicles (SIV), Money Market Funds (MMFs) etc.",Hint 198,1,3
"With reference to the Marginal Standing Facility (MSF), consider the following statements.1.It is a penal rate and is fixed above the repo rate2.It is last resort for the bank once they exhaust all borrowing options3.Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) has lower rate of interest in comparison with the MSF4.Its purpose is to reduce volatility in the overnight lending rates in the interbank marketWhich of the following statements is/are correct?","1, 2 and 3 only",1 and 4 only,"2, 3 and 4 only","1, 2, 3 and 4",4,"Statement 1 is correct. Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) is a penal rate , is always fixed above the repo rate.",Hint 199,1,1
"With reference to Sovereign Credit Rating given by various credit rating agencies, consider the following statements:1.Better sovereign ratings can make it cheaper to borrow money when needed.2.Economic factors alone are considered for preparing sovereign credit rating.3.More economically-developed countries are less likely to default hence, they will get a good sovereign credit rating.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"Statement 1 is correct. Better sovereign ratings can reduce inflation risk, ensure political stability, and make it cheaper to borrow money when needed. Better sovereign ratings attract investors.
Sovereign ratings represent a useful tool for international investors to determine a countrys investment quality.
Statement 2 is incorrect. Sovereign Credit Ratings issued to sovereign entities like national governments take into account political risk, regulatory risk and other unique factors to determine the likelihood of a default.
The three most popular issuers of sovereign ratings are S&P, Moodys and Fitch.
Statement 3 is correct. More economically-developed countries are seen has less likely to de fault. On the other hand, countries with a history of defaulting are perceived to have a higher credit risk.",Hint 200,1,2
The revenue expenditure in Indian economy will include1.Interest Payment on debt incurred by government2.Defence services3.Subsidies4.Loans made to state governments5.Grants given to state governmentsSelect the correct answer using the code given below,"1, 2 and 3 only",4 and 5 only,"1, 2, 3 and 5 only","1, 2, 4 and 5 only",3,"Revenue Expenditure: It is expenditure incurred for purposes other than the creation of physical or financial assets of the central government. It relates to those expenses incurred for the normal functioning of the government departments and various services, interest payments on debtincurred by the government, and grants given to state governments and other parties (even though some of the grants may be meant for creation of assets).
Budget documents classify total expenditure into plan and non-plan expenditure.
According to this classification, plan revenue expenditure relates tocentral Plans (the Five-Year Plans) and central assistance for State and Union Territory plans. Non-plan expenditure, the more important component of revenue expenditure, covers a vast range of general, economic and social services of the government. The main items of non-plan expenditure are interest payments, defence services, subsidies, salaries and pensions.
Interest payments on market loans, external loans and from various reserve funds constitute the single largest component of non-plan revenue expenditure. Defence expenditure, is committed expenditure in the sense that given the national security concerns, there exists little scope for drastic reduction. Subsidies are an important policy instrument which aim at increasing welfare. Apart from providing implicit subsidies through under-pricing of public goods and services like education and health, the government also extends subsidies explicitly on items such as exports, interest on loans, food and fertilisers.
And loans are the part of a capital expenditure.",Hint 201,1,3
Which of the following is/are the investment limit(s) imposed by SEBI on FII?1.They cannot buy treasury bills2.They can hold maximum 10% share in an Indian company3.They cannot become board of director in any Indian commodity exchangeSelect the correct answer using the code given below,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"Investment limit(s) imposed by SEBI on FII are as follows:
It cannot buy treasury bills
It can hold maximum 10% shares in a company they dont need to sell 1% to get back in 10% limited.(FMC rule) It cannot become board of director in any Indian commodity exchange.",Hint 202,1,1
Convertibility of rupee means freely permitting the conversion of rupee to other currencies and vice versa. The advantage(s) of convertibility of Rupee is/are1. Encouragement to exports2.Incentive to send remittances from abroad3.Encouragement to importSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 3 only,3 only,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"Statement 1 is correct. The exporters and others who receive US dollars, PoundSterlings etc. can go to these dealers which are generally banks and get their dollars exchanged for rupees at the market determined rates of exchange.
Similarly, under currency convertibility, importers and other who require foreign exchange can go to these banks dealing in foreign exchange and get rupees converted into foreign exchange.
Statement 2 is correct. Rupee convertibility provides more incentives for sending forex remittances legally. Statement 3 is incorrect. Imports become expensive and result in import substitution.
The Governments strategy that emphasizes replacement of some agricultural or industrial imports to encourage local production for local consumption, rather than producing for export markets.
Import substitutes are meant to generate employment, reduce foreign exchange demand, stimulate innovation, and make the country self- reliant in critical areas such as food,defene, and advanced technology.",Hint 203,1,2
Consider the following liquid assets:1.Demand deposits with the banks2.Time deposits with the banks3.CurrencyThe correct sequence of their decreasing order of liquidity is,2 – 3 – 1,3 – 2 – 1,1 – 3 – 2,3 – 1 – 2,4,"Order of liquidity is the presentation of assets in the balance sheet in the order of the amount of time it would usually take to convert them into cash.
Thus, cash (currency) is always presented first,
After cash, demand deposit with the bank is come before the time deposit because demand deposit is the one which you can be withdraw any time from the bank however, time deposit is a deposit in a bank account that cannot be withdrawn before a set date or for which notice of withdrawal is required.
Knowledge base
Broad classification contains Cash first, followed by marketable securities, then accounts receivable, then inventory, and then fixed assets.",Hint 204,1,3
Which of the following statements is/are true about The India Aspiration fund?1.It has been set up under Mudra Bank2.The fund will be used for venture capital financing in the MSME sector.Select the correct statement using the codes given below,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"Statement 1 is incorrect. India Aspiration Fund (IAF) has been set up under the Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) with the support from Government of India and Reserve Bank of India.
Statement 2 is correct. India Aspiration Fund (IAF) is a Fund of Funds, which would invest in Venture Capital Funds for meeting the equity requirements of MSMEs, especially Start-ups.
Knowledge Base
SIDBI under the first fund India Aspiration Fund (IAF) would invest in venture capital funds for meeting the equity requirement of MSME start-ups and for this the initial corpus of Rs. 2,000 crore has been set. Life Insurance Corp. of India (LIC) will be a partner and co-investor in this fund.",Hint 205,1,1
"Alternative Investment Fund (AIF) includes,1.Angel investment2.Venture capital fund3.Hedge fund4.Foreign Portfolio investmentSelect the correct answer using the code given below",1 and 2 only,"1, 3 and 4 only","1, 2 and 3 only","1, 2, 3 and 4",3,"Anything alternate to traditional form of investments gets categorized as alternative investments. Generally, investments in stocks or bonds or fixed deposits or real estates are considered as traditional investments. However, even with respect to investments instocks, if the investments are in the stocks of small and medium scale enterprises (SMEs), it gets categorized as alternative investments in many jurisdictions
In India, AIFs are defined in Regulation 2(1) (b) of SEBI (AIF) Regulations, 2012. There are 3 types of AIF Category:
Category 1: Angel investors, venture capital funds, small and medium enterprises (SME) funds, Social venture funds infrastructure funds They help new entrepreneurs,startup companies and infra. Development
Category 2: Private equity funds, Debt funds
They use leverage only for day to day requirements. Hence, less dangerous than Hedge Funds. Category 3: Hedge funds
They pose systematic risk to Indian market, due to complex trading strategies.
FPI is totally a different category. It is called as hot money. Do not confuse with FPI and AIF.",Hint 206,1,2
Consider the following statements regarding the Non-Performing Asset:1.interest and/or instalment of principal remain overdue for a period of more than 90 days in respect of Term Loan.2.the instalment of principal or interest thereon remains overdue for two crop seasons for long duration crops.3.the bill remain overdue for a period of more than 90 days in the case of bills purchased and discounted.Which of the above statements is/are correct?,1 only,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"As per RBI guidelines Non-performing asset (NPA) is a loan or an advance where:
1.Interest and/or instalment of principal remain overdue for a period of more than 90 days in respect of Term Loan. 2.The instalment of principal or interest thereon remains overdue for one crop seasons for long duration crops.
3.The instalment of principal or interest thereon remains overdue for two crops seasons for short duration crops. 4.The bill remains overdue for a period of more than 90 days in the case of bills purchased and discounted.",Hint 207,1,3
"With reference to the Pension Fund Regulatory & Development Authority (PFRDA), consider the following statements:1.It aims to organize pension system to serve the old age income needs of people on a sustainable basis.2.It does not deal with the concerns related to pensions of Armed Forces.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"Statement 1 is correct. Pension Fund Regulatory & Development Authority (PFRDA) is a statuary pension regulatory authority established in 2003 under the PFRDA Act.
PFRDA aims to be a model Regulator for promotion and development of an organized pension system to serve the old age income needs of people on a sustainable basis.
Statement 2 is correct. PFRDA does not deal with the concerns related to pensions of Armed Forces.
The policy matters relating to pensions of Defence Forces Personnel are managed and regulated by department of ex-servicemen welfare, Ministry of Defence.",Hint 208,1,1
What are the components of Monetary base of the RBI?1.Currency in circulation with the public.2.Vault cash of the commercial banks.3.Deposits of the commercial banks with RBI.4.Deposits of the government with the RBI.Select the correct answer using the codes given below.,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,"2, 3 and 4 only","1, 2, 3 and 4",4,"All the items mentioned in question are included in Monetary Base.
The total liability of the monetary authority of the country, RBI, is called the monetary base or high powered money. It consists of 1)currency (notes and coins in circulation with the public and vault cash of commercial banks)
2)deposits held by the Government of India and 3)commercial banks with RBI.",Hint 209,1,2
"With reference to supply of money, consider the following statements.1.M1 is easiest for transactions.2.M3 is known as aggregate monetary resource.3.Interbank deposits doesnt form a part of money supply.Which of the above statement(s) is/are correct?","1, 2 and 3",1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,2 only.,1,"All the statements are correct. M1 = CU + DD
M2 = M1 + Savings deposits with Post Office savings banks M3 = M1 + Net time deposits of commercial banks
M4 = M3 + Total deposits with Post Office savings organisations (excluding National Savings Certificates)where, CU is currency (notes plus coins) held by the public andDDisnet demand deposits held by commercial banks. The word netimplies that only deposits of the public held by the banks are to be included inmoney supply.
The interbank deposits, which a commercial bank holds in othercommercial banks, are not to be regarded as part of money supply. M1 and M2 are known as narrow money. M3 and M4 are known as broad money. These gradations are in decreasing order of liquidity. M1 is most liquid and easiest fortransactions whereas M4 is least liquid of all. M3 is the most commonly used measure of money supply. It is also known as aggregate monetary resources",Hint 210,1,3
"With reference to the Insurance Regulatory Development Authority of India (IRDA), which of the following statement(s)is/are correct?1.They are concerned with regulation and promotion of insurance and reinsurance industries in India2.They provide a host of insurance policies to the general public.Select the correct answer using the code given below",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"Statement 1 is incorrect. The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDA) is an autonomous, statutory agency for regulating and promoting the insurance and re-insurance industries in India.
Statement 2 is correct. They do not provide insurance policies directly. It isthe work of insurance companies in Public and Private sector.",Hint 211,1,1
Which of the following committee has submitted report on promoting digital payments to the Union Government?,Vinod Rai committee,RatanWatal committee,Deepak Mohanthy committee,Rangarajan Committee,2,"TheRatanWatal committee has recently submitted report on promoting digital payments to the Union Government. The committee hassuggested a separate regulator to deal with issues concerning payment, among others.
The report suggested a host of fiscal incentives to promote digital transactions. It suggested withdrawal of all charges levied by government departments and utilities on digital payments and making it mandatory for government departments and agencies to provide option to consumers to pay digitally.
The report also suggested putting a special emphasis on digital payments for recurring low value transactions and reducing custom duties on payments acceptance equipment. The committee has also suggested instituting awards to promote digital transaction.",Hint 212,1,2
-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-
"The term Bad Bank, often seen in news, refers to a bank:",Facing liquidity crisis as a result of bad loans.,Dedicated towards financing the needs of badly performing sectors of the economy.,That fails to meet its Cash Reserve Ratio CRR) obligations.,That buys the bad loans from other banks to free up their books for fresh lending.,4,"1.A bank set up to buy the bad loans of a bank with significant nonperforming assets. By transferring the bad assets of an institution to the bad bank, the banks clear their balance sheet of toxic assets but would be forced to take write downs.
2.The problem of non-performing assets in Indian banks particularly the PSBs has assumed large proportions. In this light a suggestion is the formation of a Bad Bank.",Hint 213,1,3
The term teaser loans refers to:,Loans given to infrastructure sector with nominal 1% rate of interest.,Loans with nominal rate of interest given to high net worth customers with zero liability.,Loans with higher rate of interest in the initial period and lower in the later period.,Loans with lower rate of interest in the initial period and higher in the later period.,4,"1.Teaser loans refers to loan which have differential rate of interest, which are particularly lower in the initial period and higher in the later period. For this type of loan an introductory rate is offered. It is an interest rate charged to a customer during the initial stages of a loan. This rate, which can be as low as 0%, is not permanent. It has an expiration after a specified period of time.
2.Under the teaser loan offer, a bank charges lower interest rates for the first two or three years and in the later years the interest rate will automatically get reset to the then prevailing base rates.
3.These loans were banned by RBI in the past, as they lure the lower bracket group and put them under duress in the later period due to higher rate of interest.",Hint 214,1,1
"With reference to Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, consider the following statements:1.It aims to promote foreign direct investment into developing countries.2.It is a member of world bank group.3.It issued first rupee denominated masala bonds.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?","1, 2 and 3",2 and 3 only,1 and 2 only,1 only,3,"1.Statement 1 is correct: The mission of Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, is to promote foreign direct investment (FDI) into developing countries to help support economic growth, reduce poverty, and improve peoples lives. MIGA insures cross-border investments made by investors in any MIGA member country into a developing member country.
2.Statement 2 is correct: MIGA is a member of the World Bank Group.
3.Statement 3 is not correct: International FinanceCorporation (IFC) issueIndias first masala bonds to tap in foreign funding in local currency.",Hint 215,1,2
Which of the following statements is/are correct with respect to District Central Co-operative Banks DCCB)?1.They operate as the apex bank for all cooperative societies in the district.2.They are regulated by both RBI and NABARD.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,Neither 1 nor 2,Both 1 and 2,2 only,1 only,2,"1.Both statements 1 and 2 are correct.
2.District Central Co-op Banks: They operate as the apex bank for all cooperative societies in the district and, therefore, are governed by state government and NABARD. Since they are regulated by the Banking Regulations Act, they are governed by the RBI also.
3.The Banking model consists of a district central bank for each District in every state. The members and their elected directors who represent a multitude of professional cooperative bodies like Milk Unions, Urban cooperatives,Rural cooperatives, agricultural andnon agricultural cooperatives and various others, in turn would elect the banks President. These banks are collectively represented by a State Apex Central Cooperative bank for each state and it acts as the ultimate bank and apex body for the DCCs under each state.",Hint 216,1,3
Recently launched web based application e-CHARAK is a platform:,that serves as a knowledge repository for AYUSH doctors.,to act as repository of technologies and market information related to cotton cultivation.,that serves as a virtual market place for cottage industries.,for information exchange between various stakeholders in the medicinal plants sector.,4,"1.e-CHARAK (e-Channel for Herbs, Aromatic, Raw material And Knowledge) is a platform to enable information exchange between various stakeholders involved in the medicinal plants sector. It has been jointly developed by the National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB), Ministry ofAyush, Government of India and Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC).
2.It serves as a virtual market place for buyers and sellers of medicinal plants sector to interact with each other and also as virtual showcase to display products and services related to medicinal plants sector.
3.It acts as a knowledge repository of technologies, market information and other resources related to medicinal plants sector.e-CHARAK is available both as a web and mobile version.",Hint 217,1,1
The index for residential prices RESIDEX) is published by which of the following organisations?,Niti Aayog,National Housing Bank,United Nations Habitat,World Bank,2,"1.The index for residential prices (RESIDEX) is published by the National Housing Bank (NHB). It is a property price tracking index. It is used by various departments of the Government of India for categorization of people for the implementation of various schemes. For example, department of urban development uses RESIDEX as one of the parameters to identify residents belonging to Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) etc.",Hint 218,1,2
Consider the following statements with regard to Central Issue Price CIP) in India:1.It is the price at which central government issues food grains to state governments and UTs.2.It will be more than the economic cost of food grains incurred by the Central Government.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2 only,1 only,4,"1.CIP is the price at which central government issues food grains to state governments and UTs. (statement 1 is correct)
2.CIP will be much less than the economic cost incurred by the Central Government by way of procurement, storage, transport and distribution. The difference between the economic cost and the CIP, called the consumer subsidy, is borne by the Central Government through its annual non-Plan budget. (statement 2 is incorrect).",Hint 219,1,3
"With reference to the National Investment and Manufacturing Zones NIMZs), consider the following statements:1.It aims to increase the sectoral share of manufacturing in GDP to 25% by 2022.2.It will be declared as an industrial township under Article 243 of the constitution.3.Andhra Pradesh is the first state to set Indias first national investment and manufacturing zone.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1 only,3,"National Investment and Manufacturing Zones (NIMZs) : - Envisaged under National Manufacturing Policy NIMZs would be managed by SPVs (Special Purpose Vehicles) which would ensure master planning of the Zone; pre-clearances for setting up the industrial units to be located within the zone and undertake such other functions as specified in the various sections of this policy.
To enable the NIMZ to function as aself governing and autonomous body, it will be declared by the State Government as an Industrial Township under Article 243 Q(c) (Part IXA) of theConstitution.Hence
Statement 2 is correct. Objectives of NIMZ:
1.To increase the sectoral share of manufacturing in GDP to 25% by 2022.Hence Statement 1 is correct.
2.To double the current employment level in the sector.
3.To enhance global competitiveness of the sector
Andhra Pradesh is the first state to set Indias first national investment and manufacturingzone.Hence Statement 3 is correct.</span",Hint 220,1,1
Consider the following about spot markets in India.1. They are electronic financial markets where on spot deals for futures in commodities are fixed.2. National Spot Exchange Limited (NSEL) is the only recognized spot market in India.3. They are regulated by the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI).Select the correct answer using the codes below.,1 and 3 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1 and 2 only,2,"Justification: Statement 1: It is a public financial market in which financial instruments or commodities are traded for immediate delivery. It contrasts with a futures market, in which delivery is due at a later date. So, 1 is incorrect.
Statement 2: There are many players in the sport market, for e.g. NCDEX Spot Exchange Limited, Indian Bullion Spot Exchange limited. NSEL is only one of them, which was also in news due to a scam.
Statement 3: Spot Exchange is presently recognized by Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution. It was regulated by the Forward Contracts Act earlier by Forward Markets Commission. Now, since FMC has been merged with SEBI, SEBI regulates it.
Learning: Current events section explains the NSEL scam very well.",Hint 221,1,2
What is/are the reason(s) behind the Twin Balance sheet problem in India?1.Rising NPAs (Non-Performing Asset) for a Public-Sector Bank.2.Corporate face huge strain on their cash position off late due to reasons like the global markets sluggishness.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1 only,2,"Knowledge base
The Economic Survey of 2015-16 acknowledges that one of the critical challenges confronting the Indian economy is the twin balance sheet problem. The balance sheets of both public-sector banks (PSBs) and some corporate houses are in terrible shape and it has been seen as a major obstacle to investment and reviving growth.
The problems faced by the Public-Sector Banks are linked directly to that of the corporate sector.
During the boom years, some companies borrowed a lot of money from banks to invest in infrastructure and commodity-related businesses, such as steel, power, infrastructure etc. But now, due to slump in both these sectors, the corporate profits have hit new lows. With low profits, the corporate is not able to repay their loans and their debts are rising at an alarming level. They have no other option other than to cut back investments.",Hint 222,1,3
"In the context of Indian economy, the Reserve Bank of India is known as the lender of last resort, because:",RBI extends loans to ensure the solvency of the commercial banks.,RBI can resolve financial crisis in the country.,RBI helps the government to reply external debt.,RBI only can lend money to the government in crisis.,1,"In case of a financial crisis in the country, the RBI stands by the commercial banks as a guarantor and extends loans to ensure the solvency of the latter. This system of guarantee assures individual account holders that their banks will be able to pay their money back in case of a crisis and there is no need to panic thus avoiding bank runs. This role of the monetary authority is known as the Lender of last resort.",Hint 223,1,1
What is Incremental Capital Output Ratio (ICOR)?,It is the ratio of a banks capital to its risk.,"It helps to calculate the risk, which might be availed by an entrepreneur.",None of the above,It is the additional amount of capital required to produce unit additional product.,4,"Incremental capital output ratio (ICOR): It is a metric that assesses the marginal amount of investment capital necessary for an entity to generate the next unit of production. Overall, a higher ICOR value is not preferredbe cause it indicates that the entitys production is inefficient. The measure is used predominantly in determining a countrys level of production efficiency.
ICOR= Annual investment/Annual increase in GDP",Hint 224,1,2
"Under Section 10(26) of the Income Tax Act, which of the following category of people are exempted from income tax?",Members of the Scheduled Tribes and the Scheduled Castes in Special Category States,Members from the Economically Backward Class in All States,"Members of the Scheduled Tribes in States of Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura",Members of the Scheduled Tribes in Chhattisgarh,3,"The Tribal of five North-eastern states
– Tripura, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh – are fully exempted from tax under Section 10 (26) of the Income Tax Act, 1961.",Hint 225,1,3
"With reference to the concept of Non-Performing Asset (NPA)s in India, which of the following statements is incorrect?","An asset, including a leased asset, becomes non-performing when it ceases to generate income for the bank.",The instalment of principal or interest there on remains overdue for one crop season for long duration crops.,"Any amount due to the bank, under any credit facility, if not paid on the due date fixed by the bank is termed NPA.",Banks can technically declare a loan as NPA which remains overdrew for 90 days or more.,3,Statement 4 is incorrect. It is an overdue amount (and not NPA) where any amount due to the bank under any credit facility is not paid on the due date fixed by the bank.,Hint 226,1,1
Which among the following are the transactions under the current account of Balance of Payments (BoP)?1.Goods2.Services3.AssetsSelect the correct answer using the codes given below.,"1,2 and 3",3 only,1 and 2 only,1 only,3,"The Balance of Payments record the transaction in goods, services and assets between the residents of the country and the rest of the world. TheBoP has two components—the current account and the capital account.
The current account records transactions in the goods and services and transfer payments. Trade in services is recorded as invisible trade and includes both factor income components and non-factor income components. Trade in goods is recorded as the balance of the exports and imports that is the trade balance. Transfer payments are receipts which the residents of the country receive for free in the form of remittances, gifts and grants.
The capital account records the sale and purchase of assets.",Hint 227,1,2
"Consider the following statements regarding the differences between Equity shares and preference shares1.Generally, Equity shares carry voting rights whereas preference shares do not carry any voting rights.2.Rate of dividend, is fixed for equity shares whereas it varies according to the profit for preference shares.Which of the above statement(s)is/are correct?",Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1 only,2 only,3,A Option is correct answer,Hint 228,1,3
"Which of the following statement(s) correctly differentiates Hedge Fund and Mutual Fund?1.Hedge funds can make money even with share market going down, mutual fund cannot.2.Hedge Funds are riskier than Mutual Fund.3.Hedge Funds can issue P-notes by themselves while Mutual funds cannot.Select the correct answer using the code given below",1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1 and 2 only,4,"Statement 1 is correct. Hedge fund is a similar investment game, where High net worth individuals (HNI) pool their money into high risky game s to earn high return on investment.
But their trading-techniques are far more complex than mutual funds, hence Hedge funds can make money even with share market going down.
Statement 2 is correct. Theyprefe r to invest in risky bonds and shares (Because high risk=high return) e.g. Shares of Kingfisher and C graded Bonds of Somalian Government. And Mutual funds usually stick to shares and bonds of reliable companies.
Hence, Hedge Funds are more risky than Mutual Fund.
Statement 3 is incorrect. Hedge funds can no longer play in P-notes because SEBI classified foreign hedge funds into CAT III FPI.
What is CAT III FPI?
SEBI classified Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPI), on two criteria: 1.Risk profile: less risky – means better category
2.KYC compliance: better Know Your customer compliance means better category Category III:
1.Example Hedge funds (also known as alternative investment fund). 2.Inotherwords, highly risky and less KYC compliance type FII are put here. 3.Cannot issue participatory note s by themselves.",Hint 229,1,1
