question,option_1,option_2,option_3,option_4,answers,explanation,hint,status,level
"With reference to the Indian Press Act, 1910 which of the following statements is correct?",It was enacted to repeal the Vernacular Press Act.,It imposed strict censorship on both vernacular and English publications.,It was based on the recommendations of a committee led by Motilal Nehru.,It was enacted during the tenure of Lord Curzon.,2,"The Indian press Act, 1910, empowered the local government to deregister an offending newspaper. It imposed strict censorship on all publications vernacular as well as English.
It was repealed in 1921 on the recommendation of a press committee chaired by Tej Bahadur Sapru. It was not based on the recommendations of a committee led by Motilal Nehru.
It was enacted during the tenure of Lord Hardinge.",Hint 1,1,1
"With reference to the nationalist response to British participation in first World War, consider the following statements:1. The Moderates supported the empire in the war as a matter of duty.2. The Extremists supported the war efforts in the belief that Britain would repay Indias loyalty in the form of self- government.3. The revolutionaries decided to utilize the opportunity to wage a war on British rule and liberate the country.Which of the statements given above are correct?",1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"All the statements are correct.
In the First World War (1914-1919), Britain allied with France, Russia, USA, Italy and Japan against Germany, Austria, Hungary and Turkey. The nationalist response to British participation in the War was three-fold –
1. The Moderates supported the empire in the War as a matter of duty;
2. The extremists, including Tilak (who was released in June 1914), supported the war efforts in the mistaken belief that Britain would repay Indias loyalty with gratitude in the form of self-government;
3. The revolutionaries decided to utilize the opportunity to wage a war and liberate the country. Indian supporters of British war efforts failed to see that the imperialist powers were fighting precisely to safeguard their own colonies and markets.",Hint 2,1,2
"With reference to the history of modern India, the MacDonnell Commission was related to",Suggest separate electorate to depressed castes.,Recommend measures for famine relief.,British policy towards tribes of Central India.,To recommend changes in use of language in administrative work.,2,"Lord Curzon appointed a Commission under the chairmanship of Sir Anthony MacDonnell to suggest measures to improve conditions during famine. The Commission emphasized the benefits of a policy of moral Strategy and early distribution of advances for purchase of seed, cattle and sinking of temporary wells. Most of recommendations of Commission were accepted by Lord Curzon.",Hint 3,1,3
"reference to provisions/outcomes of Montague Declaration, 1917, consider the following statements:1.It provided for the establishment of a responsible government in India.2.The demand for self-government could not be termed as seditious.3.It aimed at increasing association of Indians in every branch of administration.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"On 20th August, 1917 Lord Montague, the Secretary of State for India, made the following declaration in British Parliament: The Policy of His Majestys government… is that of increasing association of Indians inevery branch of administration, and the gradual development of self- governing institutions, with a view to the progressive realization of responsible government in India as an integral part of the British empire. Importance of Montagus Statement- From now onwards, the demand by nationalists for self-government or Home Rule could not be termed as seditious since attainment of self-government for Indians now became a government policy, unlike Morleys statement in  1909 that the reforms were not intended to give self-government to India.",Hint 4,1,1
"With reference to Tilaks Home Rule, consider the following statements:1.Along with the demand for swaraj he also sought for linguistic reorganization of states.2.Use of religious festivals was an important strategy used by Tilak during Home Rule agitation.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 and 2,1,Tilak promoted the Home Rule campaign with a tour of Maharashtra and popularized the demand for home rule. He also linked up the question ofswaraj with the demand for the formation of linguistic states and education in the vernacular. There was no trace of religious appeal; the demand for Home Rule was made on a wholly secular basis. Celebration of religious festivals likeGanpati andShivaji was used byTilak for mass mobilization during Swadeshi Movement.,Hint 5,1,2
"With reference to Ghadar Movement, consider the following statements:1.The Ghadar party believed that the British rule  could be overthrown by armed revolt only.2.Based in San Francisco, the movement aimed to fight against the discrimination against Indians immigrants in North America.3.The Defence of India Act was passed by British to suppress the movement.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"The plans of political action outlined byLalaHardayal forGhadar Party were based on the understanding that British rule could only be overthrown by armed revolt and for this to happen it was necessary that Indian immigrants go to India in large numbers and carry this massage to the masses and the soldiers of the Indian army. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
It was believed that freedom available in America was not to be used to fight against Americans, for in any case Indians would never be accepted as equals abroad till they were free in their own land. Hence, statement 2 is wrong.
The Defence of India Act was passed by British primarily to smash theGhadar movement.",Hint 6,1,3
Consider the following pairs:Newspaper/JournalFounder/ Editor1.Bengalee:Girishchandra Ghosh2.Al Hilal:Maulana Abul Kalam Azad3.Yugantar:Sachindranath SanyalWhich of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?,1 and 2 only,1 only 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"Bengalee was published in 1862 from Calcutta byGirishchandra Ghosh, taken over bySurendranathBanerjea in 1879. Hence, statement 1  is correct.
The Al-Hilal was a weekly Urdu language newspaper established by the Indian leaderMaulanaAbulKalam Azad and used as a medium for criticism of the British Raj in India. The first issue came out on 13 July 1912.
JugantarPatrika (Bengali:????????)was a Bengali revolutionary newspaper founded in 1906 in Calcutta byBarindra Kumar Ghosh,Abhinash Bhattacharya andBhupendranathDutt.",Hint 7,1,1
"With reference to Morley Minto Reforms of 1909, consider the following statements:1.An Indian could now become the member of Governor Generals executive council.2.The reforms introduced the system of separate electorates for Muslim and Sikhs3.It introduced elected non-official majority in the legislative councils of the provinces.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"Morley Minto Reforms/India Council Act of
1909 had the following provisions: Increased the number of elected members in the Imperial Legislative Council and Provincial legislative councils.
An Indian was to be appointed a member of the Governor-Generals Executive Council The Act permitted members to introduce resolutions; increased power to ask questions; voting on separate budget items was allowed
It introduced the system of separate electorate for Muslims.
In the provincial councils, non- official majority was introduced but since some of these non-officials were nominated and not elected the overall non-elected majority remained.",Hint 8,1,2
Who among the following was/were among the founding fathers of the All India Muslim League ?1.Mohammad Ali   Jinnah2.Sir Syed Ahmed khan3.Aga Khan4.Maulana Abul Kalam AzadSelect the correct answer from the code given below.,1 and 3 only,3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 4 only",2,"At the end of 1907, All India Muslim League was founded by people like Aga Khan, TheNawab of Dacca andNawabMohsin -ul-Mulk. Jinnah was a member of Congress when League was founded and he joined it LaterMaulanaAbulKalam Azad was congress memberSir Syed Ahmed Khan died before the formation of All India Muslim League",Hint 9,1,3
"Which of the following decisions were taken at Delhi Durbar, 1911 ?1.It was decided to annul the partition of Bengal .2.It was decided to shift the capital of British India from Delhi to Calcutta.3.It was decided to release Tilak and many extremist leaders.Select the correct answer from the code given below.","1, 2 and 3",1 and 3 only,2 only,None,4,"Concession for annulment of partition of Bengal was given in Delhi durbar of 1911. In the same year in Delhi durbar of 1911oranized to commemorate the coronation of
British king George V as the king of British Empire and the shifting of capital was announced form Calcutta to Delhi",Hint 10,1,1
"With reference to revolutionary activities, which of the following pairs is/are correctly matched?EventLeaders1.Maniktala  Bomb Conspiracy:Aurobindo Ghosh2.Muzaffarpur Murders:Khudiram Bose3. Rand Murder:Chapekar Brothers4. Col.Curzon Wyllie Murder:V.D. SavarkarSelect the correct answer using the code given below.",1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3 only",2 and 4 only,"2, 3 and 4 only",2,"Alipore Conspiracy - The government searches for illicit arms at Maniktala Gardens and elsewhere in Calcutta led to the arrest of 34 persons including the two Ghosh brothers,Aurobindo andBarindra.
Muzaffarpur Murders - An attempt was made to murder Mr.Kingford, the Judge ofMuzaffarpur. The bomb was by mistake instead killed two ladies.PraffulaChaki andKhudiram Bose were arrested;Chaki shot himself dead while Bose was tried and hanged.
Rand Murder - It was committed byChapekar Brothers,Damodar andBalkrishna. They killed W.C. Rand, the notorious chairman of the Poona Plague Commission, which was allegedly responsible for the atrocities perpetrated by the soldiers during their house searches to identify plague victims. Col. Curzon Wyllie Murder - It was committed by Madan LalDhingra. V.D.Savarkar,Hardayal and Madan LalDhingra were members of the India Home Rule Society set up byShyamjiKrishnavarma. After this incident, Madan Lal was hanged andactivities of the India House were wounded up.",Hint 11,1,2
Which of the following newspapers was/were launched by Annie Besant?1.New India2.Young India3.CommonwealSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,3 only,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"Young India was launched byJamnadasDwarkdas,Shankerlal Banker andIndulalYagnik. The other two were of Annie Besant.",Hint 12,1,3
"With reference to Indian National Congress session at Lucknow in 1916, consider the following statements:1.It was presided over by Annie Besant.2.At this session extremists were accepted back into Congress.3.Congress decided to oppose Muslim Leagues demand of separate electorate for Muslims.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.Statement 1 is not correct. The session was presided over byAmbikaCharanMajumdar.
2.Statement 2 is correct. The extremists including were welcomed back into the Congress by the Moderate president,AmbikaCharanMazumdar at this session.
3.Statement 3 is not correct. The Lucknow Congress was significant also for the famous Congress League Pact, popularlyknow as the Lucknow Pact. BothTilak and Annie Besant had played a leading role in bringing about this agreement between the Congress and the League, much against the wishes of many important leaders, including Madan MohanMalaviya. The pact accepted the principle of separate electorates for the Muslims.",Hint 13,1,1
When Gandhiji returned to India from South Africa he was not in favour of Home rule agitation because:1.He thought it was too early to demand for swaraj.2.He had faith in the moderate methods only.3.He believed that it was not the best time to agitate for Home rule when Britain was in the middle of a war.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 and 2 only,3 only,1 and 3,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.Statement 1 isincorret:Gandhiji returned to India in January 1915. He decided not to take any position on any political matter for at least one year. However he had no such opinion that it was too early to demand forswaraj.
2.Statement 2 is incorrect: He was convinced about the limitations of moderate politics and was not in favour of Home Rule agitation which was becoming popular at that time.
3.Statement 3 is correct: He thought that it was not the best time to agitate for Home Rule when Britain was in the middle of a war. He was convinced that the only technique capable of meeting the nationalist aims was a non-violentSatyagraha.",Hint 14,1,2
Consider the following statements with regard to Bhagat Singh:1.He Believed communalism was as big enemy as colonialism.2.He launched political-ideological campaign against Lala Lajpat Rai.3.He established Punjab Naujawan Bharat Sabha.Which of the statement given above is/are correct?,1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Statement 1 is correct. Being fully and consciously secular, he understood, more clearly than many of his contemporaries, the danger     that communalism posed to the nation and the national movement. He often told his audience that communalism was as big an enemy as colonialism. In April 1928, at the conference of youth whereNaujawan Bharat Sabha was reorganized,Bhagat Singh and his comrades openly opposed the suggestion that youth belonging to religious communal organizations should be permitted to become members of the Sabha. Religion was ones private concern and communalism was an enemy to be fought, arguedBhagat Singh.
2.Statement 2 is correct.Bhagat Singh reveredLajpat Rai as a leader. But he would not spare evenLajpat Rai, when, during the last years of his life,Lajpat Rai turned to communal politics. He then launched a political-ideological campaign against him. BecauseLajpat Rai was a respected leader, he would not publicly use harsh words of criticism against him.
3.Statement 3 is correct.Bhagat Singh helped establish the PunjabNaujawan Bharat Sabha in 1926 (becoming its founding Secretary), as the open wing of the revolutionaries. The Sabha was to carry out open political work among the youth, peasants and workers. It was to open branches in the villages. Under its auspices,Bhagat Singh used to deliver political lectures with the help of magic lantern slides.Bhagat Singh andSukhdev also organized the Lahore Students Union for open, legal work among the students.",Hint 15,1,3
"With reference to the Indian national movement, Abhinav Bharat was:",A secret society of revolutionaries,Newspaper published by the extremists,A tribal movement of central India,Concept of swaraj as envisaged by moderates,1,"In 1904, V. D.Sarvarkar organizedAbhinav Bharat as a secret society of revolutionaries.",Hint 16,1,1
"Consider the following statements with regard to Morley Minto Reforms of 1909:1.It increased the number of elected members in both Imperial Legislative Council and provincial councils.2.It introduced separate electorate for Muslims, Sikhs and Christians.Which of the above statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"1.Statement 1 is correct: This reform increased the number of elected members in both Imperial Legislative Council and the provincial councils. But most of the elected members were elected indirectly.
2.Statement 2 is incorrect: Morley Minto Reform introduced separate electorate for the Muslim not for the Sikhs and Christians.",Hint 17,1,2
Which of the following pairs are correctly matched?IncidentLeaders associated1.Chittagong raid: Surya Sen2.Kakori robbery: Ram Prasad Bismil3.Meerut Conspiracy : S. A. Dange4.Kanpur Conspiracy: M. N. RoySelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 3 only,2 and 4 only,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 2, 3 and 4",4,"1.Pair 1 is correct. Chittagong Raid was organised in Bengal by Surya Sen in 1930.
2.Pair 2 is correct. Ram Prasadbismil was involved in and tried underKakori robbery.
3.Pairs 3 and 4 are correct. Both Meerut and Kanpur Conspiracy case were tried against communists. S.A.Dange being a communist leader, was tried in Meerut case. M.N Roy was also a communist leader. He was tried in Kanpur Conspiracy.",Hint 18,1,3
Which among the following were the reasons for the restrictions on Indian immigration into Canada in 1908 which lead to Komagata Maru incident?1.Resentment of Native American labourers against Indian labourers who offered competition.2.Apprehension of British officials that familiarity of Indians with Whites was not good for British prestige.3.British were apprehensive that Indians would come under influence of socialist ideas.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Statement 1 is correct. Agitations against the entry of the Indians were launched bynative American labourers and these were supported by politicians looking for the popular vote. White labour force and unions resented the competition they offered.
2.Statement 2 is correct. The Secretary of State for India urged for restrictions on immigration. For one, he believed that the terms of close familiarity of Indians with Whites which would inevitably take place in America was not good for British prestige; it was by prestige alone  that India was held and not by force.
3.Statement 3 is correct. He was further worried that the immigrants would get contaminated by socialist ideas, and that the racial discrimination to which they were bound to be subjected would become the source of nationalist agitation in India. The combined pressure resulted in an effective restriction on Indian immigration into Canada in 1908.",Hint 19,1,1
"Consider the following statements:1.Abhinav Bharat, a secret society of revolutionaries, was organised by V. D. Savarkar.2.Newspapers Sandhya in Bengal and Kal in Maharashtra advocated revolutionary terrorism.3.Anushilan Samiti was a revolutionary organisation active in Bengal.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Statement 1 is correct.VinayakDamodarSavarkar organizedAbhinav Bharat in 1906.
2.Statement 2 is correct. Sandhya andYugantar in Bengal andKal in Maharashtra were the prominent newspapers which advocated revolutionary terrorism during early 20th century.
3.Statement 3 is correct. The revolutionary organisationAnushilanSamiti was active in Bengal. It is one of most famous revolutionary terrorism organisations of early 20th century. Its Dhaka section alone had 500 branches.",Hint 20,1,2
"The 1907 Surat session of Indian National Congress is significant in the history of the freedom movement, because:",Congress accepted separate electorate for Muslims.,Congress split into moderate and extremist groups.,Swadeshi movement was launched.,Swaraj was adopted as the goal of the Indian National Congress.,2,"1.At the Surat conference in 1907, congress split. The moderate leaders having captured the machinery of the congress excluded the militant extremist elements from it.
2.The congress split into 2 separate groups of moderates and extremists.",Hint 21,1,3
Which of the following factors resulted in popular support for Home rule league?1.The world war destroyed the myth of racial superiority of colonial powers.2.Heavy taxation and high prices during the world war.3.Failure of the congress to launch     mass movement under moderate leadership.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Statement 1 is correct: World warinvolving mutual struggle between the imperial powers destroyed the myth of racial superiority.
2.Statement 2 is correct: The war led to increased misery among the poorer classes of Indians. For them the War had meant heavy taxation and soaring prices of the daily necessities of life. They were getting ready to join any movement of protest.
3.Statement 3 is correct: The mass agitation could not be carried out under the leadership of the Indian National Congress, which had become, under moderate leadership, a passive and inert political organisation with no political work among the people to its credit. Therefore, two Home Rule Leagues were started in 1915-16, under the leadership of Annie Besant andLokamanyaTilak.",Hint 22,1,1
Which of the following is the three pronged strategy used by the British to contain both moderates and extremists post partition of Bengal?,Suppression-Conciliation-Repression,Conciliation-Suppression-Repression,Repression-Suppression-Conciliation,Repression-Conciliation-Suppression,4,"1.Postsurat split, the British formulated a three pronged policy to contain both moderates and extremists at once using Repression- Conciliation-Suppression.
2.The Extremists were to be Repressed in the first phase mildly to scare off the moderates, then the moderates were to be placated by promising some concession. Once, the moderates dissociate themselves with the extremists , the extremists were to be suppressed with the might of the state
3.To some extent the policy succeeded in causing a rift between the moderates and theextermists",Hint 23,1,2
The extremist leaders of Indian National Congress supported the government in World War-I because:,the british granted majority of their demands through Minto - Morley reforms.,they  hoped  that  Britain  would  repay Indias loyalty with self-government.,the war had improved economic conditions of India by way of increased demand.,the Britains cause of war was just.,2,"1.Both Moderates and Extremists Indian nationalist leaders, includingLokamanyaTilak, decided to support the war effort of the Government. The leaders hope was that a grateful Britain would repay India loyalty with economic and political concessions enabling India to take a long step towards self-government.",Hint 24,1,3
"With reference to Tana Bhagat movement (1912-14), Consider the following statements:1.It was a tribal movement which emerged among the Mundas and Oraons of Chottanagpur region of Bihar.2.It was characterized by a large scale incorporation of Hindu practices into its ideology.3.It gradually got linked with the freedom struggle as the tribals were followers of Gandhian ideology.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.All the statements are correct.
2.The tanaBhagat movement emerged among theMundas andOraons ofChottanagpur region of Bihar (1912-14) under the leadership of tribal mendicants known asBhagat. It is after them that the movement is known as TanaBhagat. There were numerous TanaBhagat movements which began initially asSanskritization movements to revive the original religion of theOraons.
3.In the TanaBhagat movement an attempt was made to emulate the way of life of the Hindu higher castes. Thetribals tried to raise the status of its members in the eyes of the surrounding Hindu society and was characterized by a large scale incorporation of Hindu belief- practices into its ideology.
4.After the launching of the Non- cooperation movement, the Gandhian nationalists took interest in starting constructive work among thetribals which led to the linking of these movements with the local grievances and ultimately to the national movement.
5.Initially these movements grew up with the appeal of TanaBhagat asking their followers to give up meat and liquor. In the second stage the movement was transformed into a powerful movement for internal reforms and over throw of the British. In 1920 the TanaBhagats came under the fever of nationalism when they took part in the freedom struggle by picketing against liquor shops, holding demonstrations, stagingSatyagrahas etc. It was during this phase that the nationalist symbols like honouring the poster ofBharatmata bearing the Gandhian cap, honouring the Congress flagetc, became matters of religions faith for the followers of the TanaBhagat movement. It was a unique movement wheretribals participated directly to the flow of national movement and the anti-British sentiments were expressed by the tribal through various methods and symbols.",Hint 25,1,1
Which of the following are the reasons for the rise and growth of Left Movement in India?1.Development of Indian industries.2.Economic crisis after the First World War.3.Success of the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Statement 1 is correct. The gradual industrialisation of India did not only bring the Indian capitalists into the foreground of public life, it     also created an industrial working class. The growth of tea plantations in northeastern and southern India and the beginning of an infant    iron and steel industry since the early nineteenth century, the commencement of railway construction from the middle of the nineteenth century, mining in eastern India from the same period, and the spectacular growth of two industries, the jute and the cotton industry since  the time of World War One saw the formation of an industrial working class in the organised sector in India. In addition to these, therewere workers in the so-called informal sectors, such as those who worked as casual labourers in docks and markets or as domestic servants.
2.In face of low wages, improper working conditions and often subhuman living environment, that there started unrest among the working classes which was manifested in the form of strikes such as Ahmedabad Strike (1918,1923), Jamshedpur Strike (1920,1922,1928,1948) etc. It was through these moments of confrontations that trade unions were actually born.
3.Statement 2 is correct. All the sections of the society had to face economic hardships in thepost WorldWar I period. Workers and artisans faced unemployment and bore the brunt of high prices. Peasantry was faced with high taxation and poverty. These hardships coupled with high expectations of political gains from the government created a charged atmosphere in the country.
4.Statement 3 is correct. The Bolshevik Party of workers overthrew the Czarist regime and founded the first socialist state, the Soviet  Union, under the leadership of V.I. Lenin. The October Revolution brought home the message that immense power lay with the people    and the masses were capable of challenging the mightiest of tyrants provided they were organised, united and determined. The young nationalists inspired by the Soviet Union were dissatisfied with the Gandhian ideas and political programme and wanted radical solutions for economic, political and social ills of the country. This led to the rise of the left movement in the country where stress was laid on the need to combine nationalism and anti-imperialism with social justice and simultaneously raised the question of internal class oppression  by capitalists and landlords.",Hint 26,1,2
"Regarding the Swadeshi and Boycott movement, consider the following statements:1.Self-government was declared as the goal of the Indian National Congress during this movement.2.There was an internal conflict within the Congress during the movement.3.The current national anthem of Bangladesh was composed during this movement only.Which of the statements given above is/are incorrect?",1 only,1 and 3 only,3 only,None of the above,4,"Statement 1 is correct. At the Calcutta session of the Congress in December 1906, the goal of the Indian National Congress was defined asswarajya or self-government like the United Kingdom or the colonies. Also, a resolution supporting the programme of swadeshi, boycott and national education was adopted in this session.
Statement 2 is correct. At theBenaras session (In December, 19; 1905) of the Indian National Congress presided over by Gopal KrishnaGokhale, the Moderate-Extremist differences came to the fore. Gradually, the differences became wide and ended with the split in two sects at Surat in December 1907.
Statement 3 is correct. During the Swadeshi Movement, Rabindranath Tagore wrote Amar Sonar Bangla. It later inspired the liberation struggle of Bangladesh and was adopted by it as its national anthem.",Hint 27,1,3
"Consider the following statements regarding the revolutionary terrorism that sprouted after the sudden termination of Non- cooperation Movement.1.Inspired by Russian revolution, socialism was one of the core ideas behind it.2.This new wave was the result of the disenchantment with Gandhian methods.3.There was an active participation of young women.Select the correct answer using the codes given below:",1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"All statements are correct.
The sudden withdrawal of the Non-Cooperation Movement left many of them disillusioned; they began to question the basic strategy of nationalist leadership and its emphasis on non-violence and began to look for alternatives. But since these younger nationalists were not attracted to the parliamentary work of theSwarajists or to the patient, undramatic, constructive work of the No-changers, they were drawn  to the idea that violent methods alone would free India. Thus, revolutionary terrorism was revived
Major Influences to sprout the revolutionary terrorism:
1. Upsurge of working class trade unionism after the War.
2. Russian Revolution (1917) and the success of the young Soviet state in consolidating itself. 3.Newly sprouting communist groups with their emphasis on Marxism, socialism and the proletariat.
4. Journals publishing memoirs and articles extolling the self-sacrifice of revolutionaries, such asAtmasakti,Sarathi and Bijou
5. Novels and books such asBandiJiwan by SachinSanyal and MaherDabi bySharatchandra Chatterjee (a Government ban only enhanced its popularity)
Also, there was an active participation of young women in the revolutionary terrorism.",Hint 28,1,1
Consider the following statements1.Neel Darpan was a play based on the exploitations of the Indigo farmers.2.The play Navanna by Nabin Chandra Das was based on the famine of Bengal.3.Bharat Mata painting was drawn by Abanindranath Tagore.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 and 3 only,3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"Statement 1 is correct. NilDarpan is a Bengali play written byDinabandhuMitra in 1858–1859. The play was published from Dhaka in 1860, under a pseudonym of the author.
The play was essential toNilbidraha, better known as the Indigo revolt of 1859 in Bengal, when farmers refused to sow indigo in their fields  to protest against exploitative farming under the British Raj.
Statement 2 is also correct. Navanna, a play byNabin Chandra Das. The theme of the play was based on the famine of Bengal.
Statement 3 is also correct. Bharat Mata is an epic painting by celebrated Indian painter,Abindranath Tagore. It dating back to 1905 depicts a saffron clad woman, dressed like asadhvi, holding a book, sheaves of paddy, a piece of white cloth and a garland in her four hands. The painting is also considered significant because of its historical value and since it had helped in conceptualizing the idea of Bharat Mata (Mother India).",Hint 29,1,2
"Consider the following statements regarding Indian Council Act of 19091.Legislatures could pass resolution, ask questions and vote on separate items in budget.2.A new province consisting of Bihar and Orissa was created.3.Muslims and Christians were provided separate electorate.Select the correct code from below",1 only,1 and 2 only,2 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"Only statement 4 is incorrect. Indian council act, 1909 not only provided separate electorates for the Muslims but also accorded representation to Muslims in excess of the strength of their population
Separate electorate to the Christians was provided by the government of India act, 1919, not by Indian council act, 1909.",Hint 30,1,3
Why the Lucknow Pact of 1916 is important?1.This Act reunited the moderates and the extremist.2.The Congress accepted Muslim Leagues position on separate electorates.Select the correct answer using code given below.,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,The Lucknow Pact (1916) had stimulatedCongressMuslim League cooperation and the Congress accepted Muslim Leagues position on separate electorates.,Hint 31,1,1
"With reference to Dadabhai Naoroji, which of the following statements is/are correct?1.He is referred to as the The Grand Old Man of India.2.As the president of Lahore session of Indian National Congress in 1905, he laid down the goal of Self Government or Swaraj.Select the correct answer using code given below.",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"Statement 1 is correct.DadabhaiNaoroji is known as the Grand Old Man of India.
Statement 2 is incorrect.DadabhaiNaoroji laid down the goal of Indian national movement asSelf Government or Swaraj as president of Indian National Congress in 1906 atcalcutta and not in 1905. Also 1905 INC session was held at Banaras and not atlahore.",Hint 32,1,2
The Indian National Congress did not take up social issues till 1917 due to which of the following reasons?1.Political unity was seen to be more important than social reforms till then.2.Social issues were not widely prevailing till then.3.Representation of depressed classes in congress was less till then.Select the correct answer using the codes given below.,1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"Statement 1 is correct: The congress was not willing to disrupt the social structure and customs prevailing in our Indian society, congress had primarily focused on the political unity. It wasGandhiji who gave top priority to these issues when he talked about removal of untouchability.
Statement 2 is incorrect: Even before 1917 social issues were widely prevailing in India. Statement 3 isincorrect : Representation of depressed class was never an issue in congress.",Hint 33,1,3
-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-
"With reference to the annulment of Partition of Bengal in 1911, consider the following statements:1. It was done by Viceroy Lord Minto-II.2. It was done in order to curb the menace of revolutionary nationalists.3. It was welcomed by Muslim political elite.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3 only,2 only,4,"1. The annulment of partition of Bengal was decided in 1911(Delhi Durbar) under the viceroyship of Lord Hardinge. Lord Minto - II was appointed the Viceroy of India in the year 1905 after the resignation of Lord Curzon and served office till 1910. Hence, statement 1 is not correct.
2. It was decided to annul the partition of Bengal in 1911 mainly to curb the menace of revolutionary terrorism. Hence, statement 2 is correct.
3. The annulment came as a rude shock to the Muslim political elite. Hence, statement 3 is not correct.
4. It was decided to shift the capital to Delhi as a sop to the Muslims, as it was associated with Muslim glory, but the Muslims were not pleased. Bihar and Orissa were taken out of Bengal and Assam was made a separate province.",Hint 34,1,1
Which of the following nationalist leader was the author of Gita Rahasya and The Arctic Home in the Vedas?,Bal Gangadhar Tilak,Swami Dayanand Saraswati,Rabindranath  Tagore,Mahatma Gandhi,1,"Balgangadhar Tilak was the author of Gita Rahasya and The Arctic Home in the Vedas. The Gita Rahasya was written in 1915 while in prison at Mandalay, Burma.
The Arctic Home in the Vedas was written in 1898.",Hint 35,1,2
Which of the following resolutions was/were passed by Calcutta Session of Indian National Congress in 1906?1. Swadeshi2. Swaraj3. BoycottSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,2 only,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"The Calcutta Session of INC was held under the Presidentship of Dada Bhai Naroji.The session was held in the background of Anti Partition Movement and Swadeshi Movement.
In this session INC has passed four resolutions namely-
1. Swadeshi
2. Swaraj
3. Boycott
4. National Education. Hence, option (a) is correct.",Hint 36,1,3
Which of the following factors led to the collapse of Khilafat movement?1. Factionalism within Khilafat Committee2. Differences between Gandhijiand Khilafat leaders3. Abolition of Caliphate by Mustafa Kamal PashaSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 2 and 3",2 and 3 only,1 and 2 only,1 only,1,"1. The Ottoman emperor was the supreme religious and political leader of Muslims across the world. In the World War I, the Ottoman Empire had sided the Central Powers and the result of this war was the defeat of the Central Powers. Under theTreaty of Sevres(1920),territories such as Palestine,Syria,Lebanon, Iraq,Egypt were severed from the Ottoman empire. The movement was  launched by Khilafat committee formed in March 1919 at Bombay Main demands were: Khalifa must retain pre war territories so that he is able to defend the Islamic Faith. The places which are called Jazirat-ul-arab, including the Arabia, Syria, Iraq and Palestine must not be under not Muslim suzerainty.
2. Various factors which led to its collapse were:
a. Factionalism within Khilafat Committee as the breach between ulemas allied with radical leaders and moderates began to widen.
b. There were differences between Gandhi ji and Khilafat leaders over issue of escalating the use of religious rhetoric.
c. With the abolition of Caliphate by Mustafa Kamal Pasha Khilafat question lost relevance.",Hint 37,1,1
Which of the following was/were the objectives of the Hindustan Socialist Republican Association (HSRA)?1. Substitute British Imperialism in India by a federated republic of the United States of India.2. Rouse the consciousness of the people to the futility of the Gandhian methods of non-violence.3. Demonstrate the desirability of mass based movements and prayers    & petitions for achieving complete independence.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 2 and 3",1 and 3 only,2 only,1 and 2 only,4,"Hindustan Republican Association (HRA) was reorganized to Hindustan Socialist Republican Association (HSRA) by people like Bejoy Kumar Sinha, Shiv Verma and Jaidev Kumar in U.P, and Bhagat Singh, B.C. Vohra and Sukhdev in Punjab under the overall leadership of Chandrashekhar Azad. It had a three-fold objective-
1. Ideologically inspired by Russian Revolution and the Socialist thought, substitute British Imperialism in India by a federated republic of the United States of India.
2. Rouse the consciousness of the people to the futility of the Gandhian methods of non-violence.
3. Demonstrate need and desirability of direct action and revolution for achieving complete independence.",Hint 38,1,2
Which of the following events influenced formation of All India Muslim League?1.Swadeshi Movement.2.Morleys Budget speech of 1906.3.The Hindi-Urdu language controversy.4.Formation of Hindu Mahasabha.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 2 and 4",2 and 4 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3 only",4,"Following events preceded formation of All India Muslim League:
The Hindi Urdu controversy: In the United Provinces (now Uttar Pradesh), petitions to the offices and the courts were submitted only in Urdu.as it was the court language. The Hindus for long demanded a change in this procedure. Finally on 8 April, 1900, the government gave instructions that petitions written in Hindi in theDevanagri script would also be accepted. The Muslims resented this directive and called for protest meetings all over the Province. The Hindus held counter meetings and the controversy continued for months, as the rift between the communities widened.
Partition of Bengal and Swadeshi movement: The social separation of the two communities wasfurthur politicised by the Swadeshi leaders freely using Hindu religions symbols and coercing Muslims peasants toobsrve boycott. They unwittingly allowed the movement to grow     into the Hindu- Muslim question; instead of having a secular approach to the political issue. Not all the Muslims were separatists or     loyalists at thebegining; but the Swadeshi movement soon put on then the unmistakable stamp of otherness.
Morleys Budget speech, 1906: Morleys speech of 1906 indicated that representative government was going to be introduced in India. This alarmed Muslim leaders across the board, as they thought that in the new self-governing bodies they would be swayed by the Hindu majority who were now well organised under the Congress. This providedthe context for theSimla deputation of 1 October 1906 to the Governor General Lord Minto.
In April 1915,Sarvadeshak (All India) HinduMahasabha was formed as an umbrella organization of regional Hindu Sabhas, at theKumbhMela inHaridwar. Hence, statement 4 is wrong.",Hint 39,1,3
"Which of the following decisions was/were taken at the Lucknow Session of Congress, 1916?1.The extremists were readmitted into the Indian National Congress.2.Indian National Congress accepted the demand of separate electorates by Muslim League.3.The Home Rule League movement was to be discontinued.Select the correct answer using the code given below:",1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"At the Lucknow session of the Congress in December, 1916, the extremists were welcomed back into the Congress by the Moderate president,AmbikaCharanMajumdar nearly ten years after the Surat split. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
The Lucknow Congress was significant also for the famous Congress League Pact, popularly known as the Lucknow Pact by which Muslim League and Congress agreed to separate electorate. Hence, statement 2 is correct.
The Home rule league was not discontinued by Lucknow Session of Congress. The league merged into Indian National Congress in 1920,  to forman united political front. Hence, statement 3 is not correct.",Hint 40,1,1
Which of the following were the objectives of the Hindustan Socialist Republican Association (HSRA) ?1.Substitute British Imperialism in India by a federated republic of the United States of India.2.Rouse the consciousness of the people to the futility of the Gandhian methods of non-violence.3.Demonstrate need and desirability of direct action and revolution for achieving complete independence.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1 and 3 only,3,"HRA was reorganized to HSRA by people likeBejoy Kumar Sinha, ShivVerma andJaidev Kumar in U.P, andBhagat Singh, B.C. Vohra andSukhdev in Punjab under the overall leadership ofChandrashekhar Azad. It had a three-fold objective-
1. Ideologically inspired by Russian Revolution and the Socialist thought, substitute British Imperialism in India by a federated republic of the United States of India.
2. Rouse the consciousness of the people to the futility of the Gandhian methods of non-violence. 3.Demonstrate need and desirability of direct action and revolution for achieving complete independence.",Hint 41,1,2
Which of the following statements is/are correct regarding the Congress Benares session of 1905?1. It was presided by Dadabhai Naoroji.2. Self-government or Swaraj was declared as the goal of Congress at this session.3. At the session it was decided to extend the Swadeshi movement outside Bengal.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only, None,1 only,3,"1.Statement 1 is not correct. The Indian National Congress Benares session was presided over by G.K.Gokhale.
2.Statement 2 is not correct. The goal of the Indian National Congress as self government or Swaraj like that of the United Kingdom or the Colonies was declared at the 1906 session at Calcutta presided overDadabhaiNaroji.
3.Statement 3 is not correct. The Indian National Congress took up the Swadeshi call and the Banaras Session, 1905, presided over by G.K.Gokhale, supported the Swadeshi and Boycott Movement for Bengal. The militant nationalists led byTilak,Bipin Chandra Pal,Lajpat  Rai andAurobindo Ghosh were, however, in favour of extending the movement to the rest of India and carrying it beyond the programme     of just Swadeshi and boycott to afull fledged political mass struggle. The aim was now Swaraj and the abrogation of partition had become the pettiest and narrowest of all political objects. The moderates, by and large, were not as yet willing to go that far.",Hint 42,1,3
"Consider the following pairs:AuthorWork1.Sachin Sayal:Bandi Jiwan2.Prafulla Chaki:Philosophy of Bomb3.Jawaharlal Nehru
: On the Path of LiberationWhich of the pairs given above is/are correct?","1, 2 and 3",1 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,2,"1.Pair 1 is matched correctly:SachindraNathSanyal was awell known Indian freedom fighter and one of the most significant Indian revolutionaries. He was the founder of the revolutionary organisation Hindustan Republican Association (HRA), which was established to conduct protest and opposition against the rule of the British Empire in India.SachindraNathSanyal was detained for theKakori train  robbery and eventually he was sentenced to life after the trial. He was imprisoned in the Cellular Jail in theAndamans. During his imprisonment, he wrote the renowned bookBandiJiwan, meaning A Life of Captivity.
2.Pair 2 is not matched correctly: Philosophy of Bomb was written byBhagwati Chandra Vohra.BhagwatiCharan Vohra was associated with Hindustan Socialist Republican Association.PrafulChaki was a Bengali revolutionary associated withJugantar group of revolutionaries who was involved in theMuzaffarnagar conspiracy case along withKhudiram Bose.
3.Pair 3 is not matched correctly: On the Path to Liberation was written byBhagat Singh. He also wrote Why I am Atheist.",Hint 43,1,1
Consider the following pairs:Conspiracy casePersonalities involved1. Muzzafarpur Conspiracy: Sachin Sanyal and Rash Behari Bose.2. Delhi Conspiracy: Prafulla Chaki and Kudiram Bose.3. Lahore: Bhagat Singh ConspiracyWhich of the pairs given above is/are correct?,"1, 2 and 3",1 only,2 and 3 only,3 only,4,"1.Muzzafarpur Conspiracy- Attempt on Kingsford, Judge ofMuzaffarpur byPraffulChaki &Khudi Ram Bose in 1908
2.Alipore Conspiracy Case-Aurobindo Ghosh arrested
3.Delhi Conspiracy Case (1911)-SanchinSanyal and RashBehari Bose were accused of attempting to assassinate LordHardinge
4.Kanpur Conspiracy Case (1924)- British government started the case against four communists-Muzaffar Ahmed,S.A.Dange,ShaukatUsmani andNalni Gupta. The government alleged that the Communists wanted to deprive the British King of the sovereignty of British India.
5.Kakori Conspiracy Case- On August 9, 1925, ten revolutionaries held up the train from Saharanpur to Lucknow atKakori and looted its official railway cash.Asfaqullah Khan,RumprasadBismil and RoshanLehri were hanged.
6.Lahore Conspiracy Case-Bhagat Singh,Sukhdev, Raj Guru assassinated Saunders, a police official, at Lahore to avengeLalaLajpatRaiâ€™s death. (December 1928)
7.Meerut Conspiracy Case (1929)-Bhagat Singh &BatukeswarDutt were asked to throw a bomb in the Central Legislative Assembly on April 8th 1929 against the passage of Public Safety Bill & Trade Disputes Bill.",Hint 44,1,2
Consider the following organisations:1.Abhinav Bharat2.Anushilan Samiti3.Hindustan Socialist Republican Association HSRA)Which of the above mentioned organisations was/ were engaged in assassination of oppressive officials?,1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Abhinav Bharat Society (Young India Society) was a secret society founded byVinayakDamodarSavarkar and his brother GaneshDamodarSavarkar in 1903. Initially founded at Nasik asMitraMela, the society grew to include several hundred revolutionaries and political activists with branches in various parts of India, extending to London afterSavarkar went to study law. It carried out a few assassinations of British officials, after which theSavarkar brothers were convicted and imprisoned. The society was formally disbanded in 1952.
2.AnushilanSamiti was an armed anti-British organisation in Bengal and the principal secret revolutionary organisation operating in the region in the opening years of the 20th century. Its activities included making of bombs, arms training and assassination of British officials and Indians who they viewed as traitors.
3.HSRA was involved in theassasination of John Saunders, a British official.",Hint 45,1,3
"Regarding the Home Rule movement in India, consider the following statements:1.Bal Gangadhar Tilak and Annie Besant  both simultaneously launched the Home Rule movement in India.2.The New India and Kesari were the only newspapers to advocate the movement. 3.The Indian Home Rule movement came to an end due to the Montagu Declaration in 1917.Which  of the statement(s) given above is/are correct?","1, 2 and 3",None of the above,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,2,"Statement 1 is incorrect. BalGangadharTilak and Annie Besant did not launch the Home Rule movement in India simultaneously.
Tilaks League was set up in April 1916 and was restricted to Maharashtra (excluding Bombay city), Karnataka, Central Provinces and Berar. It had six branches and the demands includedswarajya, formation of linguistic states and education in the vernacular languages.
Besants League was set up in September 1916 in Madras and covered the rest of India (including Bombay city). It had 200 branches, was loosely organized as compared toTilaks League.
Statement 2 is incorrect. By early 1915, Annie Besant had launched a campaign to demand self-government for India after the war on the lines of white colonies. She campaigned through her newspapers, New India and Commonweal, and through public meetings and conferences.
TheKesari and theMaharatta were the two main newspapers founded by BalGangadharTilak to advocate nationalistic ideas as well as Home Rule movement.
Statement 3 is incorrect. After the Montague declaration in 1917, Besant had dropped her league but notTilak. The August 1917 declaration of Montagu and theMontford reforms were influenced by the Home Rule agitation.",Hint 46,1,1
"Madan Mohan Malviya in his Presidential address at the Lahore Session in 1909 said,Ripon was the greatest and the most loved Viceroy whom India has known. Which of the following were undertaking by Lord Ripon?1.He centralized the finance.2.He repealed the salt tax.3.He repealed the Vernacular Press Act.4.Passing of the First Factory Act.Select the correct statement(s) using the codes given below.",3 only,"1, 3 and 4 only",3 and 4 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",3,"Lord Ripon (1880-1884) 1.He lowered the salt tax
2. Repeal of the Vernacular Press Act (1882).
3. The first Factory Act (1881) to improvelabor conditions. 4.Continuation of financial decentralization.
5. Government resolution on local self-government (1882).
6. Appointment of Education Commission under chairmanship of Sir William Hunter (INV.). 7.TheIlbert Bill controversy (1883-84).
8.Rendition of Mysore.",Hint 47,1,2
