question,option_1,option_2,option_3,option_4,answers,explanation,hint,status,level
"With reference to the Faizpur session of the Indian National Congress, consider the following statements:1. A resolution to draw an all India agrarian programme was passed.2. Recognition of peasant unions was suggested.3. India Kisan Sabha was formed. Which of the statements given above is/are correct?","1, 2 and 3",1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 only,2,"The Faizpur Session of the Indian National Congress was held in December 1936.
Here a resolution to draw all India agrarian programme passed. It reiterated that the most important and urgent problem of country is appalling poverty, unemployment and indebtedness of farmers.",Hint 1,1,1
Bombay plan of 1944-45 put forth by Indian capitalists provided for1. Comprehensive land reforms2. Cooperativization of production3. Government intervention and regulation in the economySelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,1 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"The Bombay plan argued for comprehensive land reform, including cooperativization of production, finance and marketing. A key principle of the Bombay Plan was that the economy could not grow without government intervention and regulation. Under the assumption that the fledgling Indian industries would not be able to compete in a free-market economy, the Plan proposed that the future government protect indigenous industries against foreign competition in local markets.",Hint 2,1,2
"With reference to the Trade Disputes Act, 1929, consider the following statements:1. The appointment of courts of Inquiry and Consultation Boards for settling industrial disputes was made compulsory.2. It encouraged political activity by trade unions.3. The strikes in public utility services were prohibited unless preceded by an advance notice of one month.Which of the statements given above are correct?",1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"Trade Disputes Act, 1929 provided for the following:
It made compulsory, the appointment of courts of Inquiry and Consultation Boards for settling industrial disputes. It forbade trade union activity of coercive or purely political nature and even sympathetic strikes.
Hence only statement 2 is not correct.
It made illegal the strikes in public utility services unless preceded by an advance notice of one month to the administration.",Hint 3,1,3
Mahatma Gandhi undertook a fast in 1943 mainly to,Protest against the violence of the British government during Quit India movement.,Resolve a deadlock between Indian National Congress and the Muslim League.,Bring an end to the communal riots in the United Provinces.,Express his solidarity with the victims of the Famine of Bengal.,1,"In February 1943, Gandhi started a fast as an answer to an exhortation by the government to condemn violence during the Quit India movement. The fast was directed against the violence of the State.There was an immediate and overwhelming response to the fast. Protests were organized at home and abroad through hartals, demonstrations and strikes.Three members of the Viceroys Executive Council resigned.
The fast had done exactly what it had been intended to do- i) the public morale was raised ii) the anti- British feeling heightened and iii) an opportunity for political activity was provided.
A symbolic gesture of resistance had sparked off widespread resistance and exposed the Governments high-handedness to the whole world
The moral justification that the Government had been trying to provide for its brutal suppression of 1942 was denied to it and it was placed clearly in the wrong.",Hint 4,1,1
"The Indian Independence Act, 1947 provided for1. A common Governor General if both India and Pakistan agreed.2. The princely states to remain independent or join either India or Pakistan.3. Both the dominions to make constitutions of their respective countries.Select the correct answer using the code given below.",1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"The Indian Independence Act was based upon the Mountbatten plan of 3rd June 1947 and was passed by the British parliament on July 5, 1947. It received royal assent on July 18, 1947.
It provided for two dominion states: India and Pakistan. The boundaries between the two dominion states were to be determined by a Boundary Commission which was headed by Sir Cyril Radcliff.
Both the dominions of India and Pakistan were to have Governor Generals to be appointed by theBritish King.",Hint 5,1,2
"With reference to the Rampa Rebellion of 1922, consider the following statements:1. It was led by Alluri Sita Rama Raju.2. The primary cause of the movement were the unjust forest laws.3. It spread across North India and parts of western India.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"The Rampa Rebellion of 1922–24, led by Alluri Sita Rama Raju was directed against the 1882 Madras Forest Act and its restrictions on the free movement of tribal people in the forest which prevented them from engaging in their traditional podu agricultural system. Hence, statements 1 and 2 are correct.
The movement took place in the border areas of the East Godavari and Visakhapatnam regions of Madras Presidency. The rebels took inspiration from the revolutionaries of Bengal and raided police stations and stole guns.",Hint 6,1,3
"All India Federation scheme proposed under Government of India Act, 1935 never came in to existance because:1. Princes were reluctant to join as it did not resolve the issue of pararmountcy.2. Muslim league opposed the scheme as it wanted decentralisation with a weak central government.Select the correct answer using the code given below.",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"All India Federation scheme proposed under Government of India Act, 1935 never came in to existance because of following reasons: Federation scheme ultimately failed because the princes were reluctant to join it. Their main objection was that the act did not resolve the issue of pararnountcy. The Government of India as a paramount power still enjoyed the right to intervene in the affairs of their states or even overthrow them if necessary. Their other fear was about joining a democratised federal central government, where the elected political leaders of British India would have little sympathy for their autocratic rules and would provide encouragement to the democratic movements in their territories. Furthermore, the larger states did not want to surrender their fiscal autonomy, while the smaller states complained of their inadequate representation in the legislarure.",Hint 7,1,1
"With reference to the Justice Movement, consider the following statements:1. It aimed to secure representation for the non- Brahmins in the legislature.2. It was centered in the Bombay presidency.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"Justice movement in Madras Presidency was started by C.N. Mudaliar, T.M. Nair and P. Tyagaraja to secure jobs and representation for the non-brahmins in the legislature. In 1917, Madras Presidency Association was formed which demanded separate representation for the lower castes in the legislature.",Hint 8,1,2
"In the context of Indian National Movement, Atmashakti, Dhumketu and Navayuga were",Journals,Secret Societies,Peasant groups,Labour unions,1,"In 1920s Atmashakti, Dhumketu and Navayuga were left nationalist journals. Atmashakti and Dhumketu were published in Calcutta. Navayuga was published in Guntur.",Hint 9,1,3
Which of the following statements is/are correct about Maulana Abul Kalam Azad?1. He was the founding member of All India Khilafat Committee.2. He was associated with Indian National Congress but never became its President.3. He held the portfolio of Education Minister in the Government formed in 1947.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"Born in Mecca where his forefathers had settled during the 1857 Revolt, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad came with his parents to India in 1898. Settled in Calcutta, he began participating in the freedom struggle by associating himself with the revolutionaries during the swadeshi uprising.
He presided over the Congress special session at Delhi in 1923 and became the youngest President.
He was again elected President of the Congress at its Ramgarh session in 1940. He remained President as no session was held in the five following years. Abdul Kalam Azad headed the Jamiat ul Ulema as President in 1924, and the Nationalist Muslim Conference five years later in the same capacity.He was made a member of the Constituent Assembly and became Minister of Education and Arts in the interim government.",Hint 10,1,1
Consider the following statements regarding August Offer of 1940:1. It proposed complete independence as the objective for India.2. It provided for expansion of the Viceroys Executive Council.3. It provided for setting up of a Constituent Assembly consisting only of Indians.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,2 only,1 and 3 only,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"August offer 1940: To get Indian cooperation in the war effort, the Viceroy Linlithgow announced the August Offer (August 1940) which proposed:
Dominion status as the objective for India.
It provided for expansion of the Viceroys Executive Council.",Hint 11,1,2
Who among the following leaders were members of Congress Socialist Party?1. Jayaprakash Narayan2. Acharya Narendra Dev3. Jawahar Lal Nehru4. Minoo MasaniSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 2 and 4 only",1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",1,"Congress Socialist Party (CSP) was formed at Bombay in October 1934 under the leadership of Jayaprakash Narayan, Acharya Narendra Dev and Minoo Masani. Congress socialists were agreed upon four basic propositions: that the primary struggle in India was the national struggle for freedom and that nationalism was a necessary stage on the way to socialism; that socialists must work inside the National Congress because it was the primary body leading the national struggle and, as Acharya Narendra Dev put it in 1934. It would be a suicidal policy for us to cut ourselves from the national movement that the Congress undoubtedly represents; that they must give the Congress and the national movement a socialist direction; and that to achieve this objective they must organize the workers and peasants in their class organizations, wage struggles for their economic demands and make them the social base of the national struggle.
However, Nehru never formally joined this group.",Hint 12,1,3
Consider following statements about Dr. B.R. Ambedkar:1. He was in favour of separate electorate for the Depressed Classes.2. He signed Poona Pact with Gandhiji to assert his demand of separate electorate for the Depressed Classes.3. He strongly opposed partition of India along religious lines.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 and 3 only,1 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"Dr. Ambedkar thought that separate electorate might help in empowerment of lower classes. But according to Gandhiji, this might have created a permanent chasm between upper classes and lower classes. So Gandhiji opposed this idea of separate electorate and in opposition of the communal award he started fast unto death which forced Ambedkar to sign Poona Pact with him and let go his demand of separate electorate, paving way for unstead, reservation of seats for the Depressed Classes in general constituencies. Hence, 1st statement is correct and 2nd statement is not correct.
Dr. Ambedkar was not opposed to partition. Ambedkar, in his treatise Thoughts on Pakistan (1941), held that a Pakistan with peaceful transfer of population is desirable for a strong India with national feeling. Hence, 3rd statement is not correct.",Hint 13,1,1
Which of the following was/were the main goals of Wavells Breakdown Plan?1. A safe withdrawal of the British from India.2. To avoid a partition of India by attempting to maintain it as one geographic entity.3. To give the Muslim League an equal say in constitution formation.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"The Breakdown Plan was prepared by Lord Wavell and his closest circle of advisors to deal with the fast evolving political situation in India. Two main political tendencies had crystallized in post-War India: Keeping India as one geographic entity; the second one was diametrically opposed to it, espoused by the Muslims, who wanted an independent Muslim-majority state.
Wavells breakdown plan was formulated with two main goals in mind: Firstly, a safe withdrawal of the British from India; secondly, to avoid a partition of India by attempting to maintain it as one geographic entity.",Hint 14,1,2
Which of the following journals/newspapers were actively used to bring awareness against partition of Bengal?1. Bengalee2. Hitabadi3. SanjibaniSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1 and 3 only,3,"During Swadeshi Movement the political ideas and propagandas was spread through pamphlets and journals. The Hitabadi led by Dwijendernath Tagore, Sanjibani led by Krishan Kumar Mitra (first to give the idea of boycott) and Bengalee by Surenderanath Banerjee. Other newspapers/journals were - Motilal Ghoshs Amrit Bazar Patrika; Brahm Bandhav Upadhyays Sandhya (it was the most outspoken newspaper); Aurbindo Ghoshs Vande Mataram, 1907 (gave the concept of passive resistance).",Hint 15,1,3
Consider the following organisations:1. Social Service League2. All India Trade Union Congress3. Indian Reform AssociationNarayan Malhar Joshi was associated with the establishment of which of the above?,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,2 only,1,"Narayan Malhar Joshi, founded the Social Service League in Bombay with an aim to secure for the masses better and reasonable conditions of life and work. They organized many schools, libraries, reading rooms, day nurseries and cooperative societies. Their activities also included police court agents work, legal aid and advice to the poor and illiterate, excursions for slum dwellers, facilities for gymnasia and theatrical performances, sanitary work, medical relief and boys clubs and scout corps.
He also founded the All India Trade Union Congress (1920). However, there was a split in 1931 and the corporatist trend led by N.M. Joshi broke away from the AITUC to set up All India Trade Union Federation. This led to a dip in the working class movement.
Indian Reform Association was formed by Keshub Chandra Sen in 1870 to create public opinion against child marriages, for upliftment of status of women and to legalise Brahmo type of marriage.",Hint 16,1,1
Consider the following:1. Personal sacrifices2. Belief in the capacity of the masses3. Direct political actionWhich of the above were the basic tenets of revolutionary school of thought during freedom struggle?,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1 and 3 only,3,"By the dawn of the 20th century, a band of nationalist thinkers had emerged who advocated a more militant approach to political work. The basic tenets of this school of thought were-
Hatred for foreign rule; since no hope could be derived from it, Indian should work out their own salvation. Swaraj to be the goal of a national movement.
Direct political action required.
Belief in capacity of masses to challenge the authority.Personal sacrifices required and a true nationalist to be always ready for it.",Hint 17,1,2
"With reference to the Wardha scheme of education, consider the following statements:1. There was no place for religious education in this scheme.2. It focused on courses through mother tongue of students.3. It proposed a special Board for women education.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3 only",1,"The Government of India Act 1935 introduced provincial autonomy and popular ministries started functioning from 1937.The Indian National Congress set at work to evolve a national scheme of education for the country called the Wardha scheme of education.
The aim of the basic education was to develop the qualities of the ideal citizenship and more aspect should be give to the Indian culture than the literacy. Also,
There was no place for English in the curriculum.",Hint 18,1,3
Gandhiji formed the Passive Resistance Association to campaign against the,European indigo planters in Champaran to abolish the tinkathia system.,British governments decision to increase land revenue during the famine conditions in Kheda district.,Mill-owners of Ahmedabad for an increase in pay of the workers.,New legislation in South Africa which made it mandatory to carry registration certificates by the Indians,4,A new legislation in South Africa made it compulsory for Indians there to carry at all times certificates of registration with their fingerprints. The Indians under Gandhijis leadership decided not to submit to this discriminatory measure. Gandhiji formed the Passive Resistance Association to conduct the campaign.,Hint 19,1,1
Which of the following was the reason behind Gandhijis resignation from the Indian National Congress (INC) in 1934?,Difference of opinion over the Poona Pact with Ambedkar.,Non-involvement of INC in the third Round Table Conference.,To take responsibility of failure of Civil Disobedient Movement.,The emergence of various ideologies made Gandhiji realise his declining influence on INC. ,4,"In 1934, Gandhiji was aware that he was out of tune with powerful trends in the Congress. One section favoured Parliamentary politics against the wishes of Gandhiji. While, other section was estranged with Gandhijis emphasis on the spinning wheel. The socialists, led by Nehru, also had differences with Gandhiji. All these led Gandhiji to announce his resignation from the Congress ?only to serve it better in thought, word and deed.",Hint 20,1,2
The second phase of Civil Disobedience Movement did not sustain for long because,The government accepted the demands of the movement and invited Gandhiji for the negotiations.,Masses were prepared but popular leaders were arrested.,Gandhiji and other leaders had no time to build up the tempo.,The congress was contented with the provisions of the Government of India act of 1935. ,3,"The second phase of Civil Disobedience Movement did not sustain for long because of the following reasons:
1. Gandhiji and other leaders had no time to build up the tempo.
2. Masses were not prepared. Hence, option (b) is not correct.
After the Congress Working Committee had decided to resume the Civil Disobedience Movement, the new Viceroy Willington refused a meeting with Gandhi on December 31 and on January 4, 1932, Gandhi was arrested.
Civil Disobedience Movement gradually waned. The Congress officially suspended the movement and withdrew it in May 1934.",Hint 21,1,3
"With reference to C. Rajagopalachari Formula, consider the following statements:1. Under this, Muslim League was to endorse Congress demand for independence.2. It was supported by Gandhiji.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"In March 1944, veteran Congress leader C. Rajagopalachari prepared a formula for Congress-League cooperation. It received the full approval of Gandhiji. Hence, statement 2 is correct.
The main points of the C.R. Plan were:
1. Muslim League to endorse Congress demand for independence. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
2. League to cooperate with Congress in forming provisional government at centre.
3. After the end of the war, the entire population of the muslim-majority areas in the North-West and North-East India to decide by a plebiscite, whether or not to form a separate state.
4. The above terms to be operative only if England transferred full powers to India.
Jinnah wanted the Congress to accept the two-nation theory. He wanted only the Muslims of the North- West and North-East to vote in the plebiscite. He also opposed the common Centre concerned with Defence, Commerce, etc. The Muslim League did not care about the independence of the whole country and wanted partition without plebiscite. Hence, it was opposed or rejected by Jinnah. Hindu leader led by Vir Savarkar condemned the CR Plan.",Hint 22,1,1
The object of the Public Safety bill was to,Provide security to peopleagainst Japanese invasion.,Regulate the movement of Ghadar party leaders.,Provide vaccination against smallpox.,Deport communist leaders from India. ,4,"The Public Safety Bill, 1928 was designed to secure the deportation of communists and also to check the flow of foreign money transmitted to India for promoting communism.",Hint 23,1,2
"With reference to the Rowlatt Stayagraha, consider the following statements:1. Mahatma Gandhi set up a Satyagraha Sabha for organising the Satyagraha.2. It met with success as Rowlatt Act was immediately repealed.3. It was a completely non-violent movement.Which of the statements given above is/are not correct?",1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1. The Rowlatt Act was a rushed through Imperial Legislative Council between 6 February and 18 March, 1919 against the unanimous opposition of all non-official Indian members.
2. Gandhi ji as yet had no control over the congress so for organizing the movement he set up a Satyagraha Sabha at Bombay. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
3. By mid of April the Satyagraha had started losing momentum, forcing Gandhi ji to withdraw it. As a political campaign it was a manifest failure, since it failed to secure its only aim i.e. the repeal of the Rowlatt Act. It was repealed in 1922. Hence, statement 2 is not correct.
4. The movement lapsed into violence soon after the arrest of Gandhi ji on 9 April and there was unprecedented mob fury in areas like Delhi, Bombay, Ahmedabad and Amritsar. Hence, statement 3 is not correct.",Hint 24,1,3
Mahatma Gandhi opposed separate electorate for untouchables because he believed that:,It was introduced without the consent of minority.,It would weaken Mahatma Gandhis position as a leader.,It would ensure that untouchables remained untouchables in perpetuity.,None of the above,3,"Communal Award of 1932 declared separate electorate for depressed classes. Gandhis opinion that once the depressed classes were treated as a separate political entity, the question of abolishing untouchability remained in perpetuity. Hence, he demanded the depressed classes be elected through joint electorate and if possible a wider electorate through universal franchise.",Hint 25,1,1
The Tripuri Session of the Indian National Congress (1939) was important in the modern Indian history because1. Subhash Chandra Bose was elected President for the first time at this session.2. It was marked by internal strife between the Congress members.3. A resolution reiterating Gandhijis leadership was moved by Govind Ballabh Pant.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,3 only,2 and 3 only,None,3,"1. Statement 1 is not correct: Subhas Bose was elected unanimously as the President of the Congress in 1938(Haripura Session). He was elected again on 29 January 1939 by 1580 votes against 1377 (Pattabhi Sitaramayya) before the Tripuri Session.
2. Statement 2 is correct: The Tripuri Session of the Congress is known for the internal strife coming to a climax between Subhash Chandra Bose and other top leaders of the Congress whom he called rightists. Subhas Bose believed that the Congress was strong enough to bunch an immediate struggle and that the masses were ready for such struggle. He argued for a programme of immediately giving the British Government a six-month ultimatum to grant the national demand for independence and of launching a mass civil disobedience movement if it failed to do so. He openly accused the rightists of working for a compromise with the Government on the question of federation. Gandhijis perceptions were very different. He believed, the time was not yet ripe for an ultimatum because neither the Congress nor the masses were yet ready for struggle. The Congress leaders, labelled as compromisers, resented Boses charges and branded them as a slander. On 22February, 13 out of the 15 members of the old Working Committee resigned, on the ground that subhas had publicly criticized them.
3. Statement 3 is correct: Govind Ballabh Pant moved a resolution at Tripuri expressing full confidence in the old Working Committee, reiterating full faith in Gandhijis leadership of the movement and the Congress policies of the previous twenty years, and asking Subhas to nominate his Working Committeein accordance with the wishes of Gandhiji.
4. The resolution was carried by 218 to 133 votes in the Subjects Committee, and by an overwhelming majority through show of hands in the open session. Jayaprakash also moved the extremely diluted National Demand resolution which dropped Boses idea of a time-bound ultimatum and merely called for preparations for a struggle to achieve a Constituent.",Hint 26,1,2
"In the context of Indian freedom struggle, Karnataka method was used as a strategy in which of the following movements?",Swadeshi movement,Non-Cooperation movement,Civil Disobedience movement,Quit India movement,4,"1. Sumit Sarkar has identified three phases of the Quit India movement.
2. The first phase was marked by an urban revolt, marked by strikes, boycott and picketing, which were quickly suppressed.
3. In the middle of August i.e. the second phase, the focus shifted to the countryside, which witnessed a major peasant rebellion, marked by destruction of communication systems, such as railway tracks and stations, telegraph wires and poles, attacks on government buildings or any other visible symbol of colo- nial authority and finally, the formation of national governments in isolated pockets. This brought in severe government repression forcing the agitation to move underground.
4. The third phase was characterised by terrorist activities, which primarily involved sabotaging of war efforts by dislocating communication systems and pro- paganda activities by using various means, including a clandestine radio station run by hitherto unknown Usha Mehta from somewhere in India. Not only the educated youth participated in such activities, but also bands of ordinary peasants organised such subversive actions by night, which came to be known as the Karnataka method.",Hint 27,1,3
Which among the following werea part of eleven demands of Mahatma Gandhi before the launch of Civil Disobedience Movement?1. Reduction of military expenditure and civil service salaries2. Commutation of the death sentence for Bhagat singh and his comrades3. Changes in the Arms Act4. Abolition of salt taxSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 3 and 4 only",1 and 3 only,2 and 4 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",1,"1. On 31 January 1930 Gandhi announced an eleven point ultimatum for Lord Irwin; if these demands were met by 11 March, he declared, there would be no civil disobedience and the Congress would participate in any conference. It was a compromise formula, which included, six issues of general interest, like reduction of military expenditure and civil service salaries, total prohibition, discharge of political prisoners not convicted of murder, reform of the CID and its popular control andchanges in the Arms Act.
2. Three specific bourgeois demands, like lowering of the rupee-sterling exchange rate, protective tariff on foreign cloth and reservation of coastal traffic for Indian shipping companies.
3. And two basically peasant themes, i.e., 50 percent reduction of land revenue and its subjection to legislative control and abolition of salt tax and government salt monopoly. It was a mixed package to appeal to a wide cross-section of political opinions and unite the Indians once again under one overarching political leadership.
However, Commutation of the death sentence for Bhagat and his comrades was not a part of Gandhis eleven demands.",Hint 28,1,1
"With reference to the Lucknow Pact of 1916, consider the following statements:1. It offered a joint League-Congress scheme for constitutional reforms and demanding dominion status for India.2. It was accepted by the Montagu- Chelmsford Reforms in 1919.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"The Lucknow Pact in 1916 offered a joint League-Congress scheme for constitutional reforms, demanding representative government and dominion status for India. Hence, statement 1 is correct. The principle of separate electorate was accepted, and proportional representation in both imperial and provincial legislature was agreed upon. The faith in constitutional politics suffered a jolt when the Montagu- Chelmsford Reforms in 1919 totally disregarded the Lucknow Pact. Hence, statement 2 is not correct.",Hint 29,1,2
Consider the following statements:1. She was a social reformer and freedom fighter.2. She persuaded Gandhiji not to restrict the salt agitation to men alone.3. She courted arrest by breaking salt law and liquor law.The above statements describe which of the following historical personality?,Sarojini Naidu,Kamaladevi Chattopadhyay,Usha Mehta,Rani Gaidinliu,2,Kamaladevi Chattopadhyay was an Indian social reformer and freedom fighter. She persuaded Gandhiji not to restrict the salt agitation to men alone. She courted arrest by breaking salt law and liquor law.,Hint 30,1,3
"With reference to Indian freedom struggle, consider the following events:1. Announcement of the Cabinet Mission.2. Elections for the Constituent Assembly.3. Shimla Conference.What is the correct chronological sequence of the above events?",1/2/2003,2/1/2003,3/2/2001,3/1/2002,4,"The Shimla Conference was convened by Lord Wavell in June 1945.
The Clement Attlee government announced the decision to send a high-powered mission of three British Cabinet Ministers to India (known as Cabinet Mission) in February 1946.
Elections in the provincial assemblies for the Constituent Assembly were held in July 1946.",Hint 31,1,1
"In the context of Tilak Swaraj Fund, consider the following statements:1. It was constituted during home rule movement.2. It aimed at collecting money to aid Indias freedom struggle and resistance to the British rule.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"1. Statement 1 is not correct: A year into the Non-Cooperation Movement in 1921, Mahatma Gandhi announced the Tikal Swaraj  Fund.
2. Statement 2 is correct: The Fund, a homage to Bal Gangadhar Tikal on his first death anniversary, aimed at collecting Rs 1 crore to aid Indias freedom struggle and resistance to the British rule. A massive amount at the time, the skeptical were proved wrong when the money came in by the set deadline of June 30. Of the collected amount, Rs 37.5 lakh was donated by Bombay, which led him to refer to the city as Bombay the Beautiful.",Hint 32,1,2
"With reference to activities under the non- cooperation movement, consider the following statements:1. Boycott of government aided colleges.2. Boycott of British courts.3. Surrender of titles and honorary offices.4. Programme of council entry to obstruct the British activities.Which of the statements given above are correct?","1, 2 and 4 only","1, 2 and 3 only",3 and 4 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",2,"The Indian National Congress outlines a seven item programme of noncooperation
1. Surrender of titles and honorary offices. Hence, statement 3 is correct.
2. Refusal to attend government durbars and official function.
3. Boycott of government aided schools and colleges. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
4. Boycott of foreign goods.
5. Refusal of all classes to offer service in Mesopotamia.
6. Boycott of British courts. Hence, statement 2 is correct.
7. Boycott of elections to provincial and central assembly election. Hence, statement 4 is not correct.",Hint 33,1,3
Which among the following is/are not correct with respect to the Communal Award?1. It gave minority status to depressed class.2. Congress rejected the Communal Award.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"1. Statement 1 is correct: Communal Award was announced by Ramsay MacDonald in August 1932. This was another expression of British policy of Divide and Rule. It declared the depressed classes to be minorities and entitled them to separate electorate.
2. Statement 2 is not correct: Congress though opposed to separate electorates, it was not in favour of changing Communal Award without the consent of minorities. Thus while strongly disagreeing with the communal award, the Congress decided neither to accept it nor to reject it.",Hint 34,1,1
Consider the following events during Indias struggle for freedom:1. Announcement of Communal Award2. Formation of All India Kisan Sabha and Congress Socialist Party3. Second and Third Round Table ConferencesThe above events occurred during the tenure of which of the following Governor Generals?,Lord Irwin,Lord Linlithgow, Lord Willingdon,Lord Reading,3,"1. Lord Willingdon served as a Viceroy and Governor General of India from 1931 to 1936.
2. The important events of this period include Second and Third Round Table Conferences, relaunching of Civil Disobedience Movement, Communal Award by Ramsay MacDonald (1932), Poona Pact (1932), Government of India Act 1935, and Separation of Burma from India.
3. The All India Kisan Sabha (AIKS), also known as the Akhil Bharatiya Kisan Sabha and All India Peasants Union, was an Indian political association of the peasants front  of  the  former  undivided Communist Party of India (CPI). The All India Kisan Sabha was  one of the Indian Organisations during Freedom Struggle and peasant movement that was founded by Swami Sahajanand Saraswati in the year 1936.",Hint 35,1,2
Which of the following was/were the component(s) of Gandhijis Struggle-Truce- Struggle (S-T-S) strategy?1. Phase of non- mass movement2. Phase of extra-legal mass struggle3. Continuous mass struggle till freedom is achievedSelect the correct answer using the codes given below:,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,Gandhijis Struggle-Truce-Struggle (S-T-S) strategy have two types of phases in the national movement. A phase of non-mass movement or war of positioninevitably follow a phase of extra-legal mass struggle or war of movementin Gramiscian terms. Gandhijis national movement does not take the form of one continuous mass struggle till freedom was won.,Hint 36,1,3
"Which among the following activity/activities was/were undertaken by Bal Gangadhar Tilak, after his release from Mandalay jail in 1914?1. He started Home Rule League movement.2. He made efforts for entry of extremists in Indian National Congress.3. He professed his support to violent revolutionary activities in India.Select the correct answer using the code given below.",1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and ",3,"1. On 16 June 1914, Bal Gangadhar Tilak was released after serving a prison sentence of six years, most of which he had spent in Mandalay in Burma.
2. Tilak initially concentrated all his attention on seeking readmission, for himself and other Extremists, into the Indian National Congress. Hence, statement 2 is correct.
3. He was obviously convinced that the sanction of this body, that had come to symbolize the Indian national movement, was a necessary pre-condition for the success of any political action.
4. Tilak started his Home League in April 1916 and covered the area of Maharashtra (excluding Bombay city), Karnataka, Central Province and Berar. To conciliate the Moderates and convince them of his bonafides, as well as to stave off any possible government repression, he publicly declared: I may state once for all that we are trying in India, as the Irish Home-rulers have been doing in Ireland, for a reform of the system of administration and not for the overthrow of Government; aid I have no hesitation in saying that the acts of violence which had been committed in the different Parts of India are not only repugnant to me, but have, in my opinion, only unfortunately retarded to a great extent, the pace of our political progress. Hence, statement1 is correct and 3 is not correct.",Hint 37,1,1
"With reference to the national freedom struggle, what does Praja Mandal refer to?",A parallel government formed during the Quit India Movement.,An organisation of Princely states where they discussed their common interets.,Nationalist peoples organisations in the Indian Princely states,A revolutionary group in Bengal to wage an armed struggle against British rule in Indi,3,"Praja Mandal was nationalist peoples organisations in the Indian Princely states. In 1920 during Non- Cooperation and Khilafat Movement powerful influence and impact created on local people in Princely states and numerous local organizations of the States people came into existence these organisation called Praja mandals or States Peoples Conferences. It was organized in Mysore, Hyderabad, Baroda, the Kathiawad States, the Deccan States, Jamnagar, Indore, and Nawanagar, Jaipur, Kashmir, Rajkot, Patiala, Mysore, Travancore, and the Orissa States.",Hint 38,1,2
Which among the following demands of Muslim League was/were accepted under Delhi Proposal?1. Joint electorate with reserved seats for Muslims.2. Representation to Muslims in Bengal and Punjab in proportion to their population.3. Formation of three Muslim majority provinces.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"In December, 1927 a large number of Muslim leaders had met at Delhi at the Muslim League session and evolved four proposals for Muslim demands to be incorporated in the draft Constitution. These proposals which were accepted by the Madras session of the Congress, 1927 came to be known as Delhi Proposals. These were:
1. Joint electorate in place of separate electorates with reserved seats for muslims.
2. Representation to muslims in Bengal and Punjab in proportion to thier population.
3. Formation of three Muslim majority provinces- Sindh, Baluchistan, North-West Frontier Province.
4. One third represtation to Muslims in Central legislative assembly",Hint 39,1,3
He became the principal of Bengal National College and was arrested in Alipore Conspiracy Case. He also started two journals- Karamyogi in English and Dharma in Bengali. He also became chief editor of Bande Mataram journal started by Bipin Chandra pal. For him aim of political action was the total independence of the country. Which of the following personality is best described by the above passage?,C.R Das,Surendera Nath Banerjee,Aurobindo Ghosh,Krishan Kumar Mitra.,3,"1. During Swadeshi Movement, national education received a great fillip and numbers of educational institutes were opened on nationalist lines. One such college was Bengal National College with Aurobindo Ghosh as its Principal. He soon became chief editor of Bande Matram journal started by Bipin Chandra pal.
2. During the first decade of 20th century, he was arrested in Alipore conspiracy case. C.R Das was his advocate and acquitted him from this case.
3. After he was released from jail, he tried to revive the nationalist movement and to that end he started two journals Karamyogi in English and Dharma in Bengali.
4. He was the first in India to declare publicly that the aim of political action was the total independence of the country.",Hint 40,1,1
"With reference to the Desai-Liaqat pact, consider the following statements:1. It was a result of failure of the Wavell plan.2. It proposed for the representation of minorities in the Interim government at the centre.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"Bhulabhai Desai, leader of the Congress with Liaquat Ali Khan, leader of the Muslim drafted a proposal for the formation of an interim government at the centre, consisting of:
1. An equal number of persons nominated by the Congress & League in the central legislature
2. 20% reserved seats for minorities. Hence, statement 2 is correct.
Desai-Liaqat Plan (Jan. 1945) was followed by the Wavell Plan (June) in 1945. Hence, statement 1 is not correct.",Hint 41,1,2
Consider the following statements regarding Mohammed Ali Jinnah:1. He was one of the founding members of All India Muslim League.2. He has presided only one session  of Indian National Congress.3. He was the first Governor General  of Pakistan.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,"1, 2 and 3",3 only,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2,"1. Statement 2 is not correct: Mohammed Ali Jinnah had never presided any Congress session.
2. Statement 1 is not correct: Jinnah was not a founding member of the Muslim League. The All-India Muslim League was founded by Agha Khan, Nawab Salimullah of Dacca, Nawab Mohsin-ul-Mulk and Nawab Waqar-ul-Mulk to preach loyalty to the British Government and to keep the Muslim intelligentsia away from the Congress.
3. Statement 3 is correct: Jinnah was the first Governor-General of Pakistan.",Hint 42,1,3
"With reference to Third Round Table Conference held in 1932, consider the following statements:1. Congress did not participate.2. Its discussion led to the formulation of Government of India Act, 1935.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"Third Round Table Conference was held in London on November 17, 1932. It was short and unimportant, Congress refused to attend it and in Britain, the Labor party also refused to not to attend it. The outcome of the Third Round Table conference was the White Paper? issued by the Government. On the basis of this paper, the Government of India Act 1935 was to be passed.",Hint 43,1,1
Which of the following was not a reason for the popular outburst during the Quit India movement?,The racist treatment of Indian immigrants in South-East Asia.,There was discontent against rising food prices.,News of reverses suffered by British in the Second World War,Failure of the Shimla Conference.,4,"The Shimla conference or the Wavell Plan took place in June 1945. Hence, its failure was not a reason for the popular outburst during the Quit India movement. Hence, option (d) is not correct.
The main reasons for Quit India Movement were -
1. The failure of the Cripps Mission in April 1942 made it clear that Britain was unwilling to offer an honourable settlement and a real constitutional advance during the War, and that she was determined to continue Indias unwilling partnership in the War efforts.
2. Popular discontent, a product of rising prices of food articles like rice and sugar, etc and war- time shortages, was gradually mounting. High-handed government actions such as the commandeering of boats in Bengal and Orissa to prevent their being used by the Japanese had led to considerable anger among the people.
3. The popular wllingness to give expression to this discontent was enhanced by the growing feeling of an imminent British collapse. The news of Allied reverses and British withdrawals from South-East Asia and Burma and the trains bringing wounded soldiers from the Assam-Burma border confirmed this feeling.
4. Combined with this was the impact of the manner of the British evacuation from Malaya and Burma. It was common knowledge that the British had evacuated, the white residents and generally left the subject people to their fate. .The manner of evacuation of the British from South-East Asia leaving the subjects to their fate, racist treatment (Black road for Indian refugees and White road for European refugees). Thus, the rout by an Asian power (Japan) shattered the white prestige and exposed the racist tendencies of the rulers.",Hint 44,1,2
Consider the following statements about Dandi March:1. It was accompanied by boycott of foreign cloth and liquor.2. Gandhiji was arrested after the dandi march.3. It was successful in reducing government revenues and imports from BritainWhich of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 3",1 and 3 only,2 only,2,"1. Statement 1 is correct: On 12 March Gandhi began his historic Dandi March to the Gujarat seashore where on 6 April he publicly violated the salt law. The march attracted enormous publicity both in India and overseas, and was followed by wholesale illegal manufacture and sale of salt, accompanied by boycott of foreign cloth and liquor.
2. Statement 2 is correct: Gandhijis arrest came on May 4, 1930 (Dandi march ended on 6th April, 1930) when he had announced that he would proceed to continue his defiance of the salt laws by leading a raid on the Dharasana Salt Works on the west coast.
3. Statement 3 is correct: It was successful in reducing government revenues and imports from Britain. Imports of cloth from Britain had fallen by half; other imports like cigarettes had suffered a similar fate. Government income from liquor excise and land revenue had been affected.",Hint 45,1,3
Which of the following is not correct regarding the Wavell Plan of 1945?,All members of the Viceroys Executive Council except the commander-in-chief were to be Indians.,Muslims were to have one-third representation in the Executive Council.,Shimla Conference was organized to discuss the provisions of Wavell Plan.,It was finally not accepted by both Muslim League and the Congress,2,"1. On 14 June, Wavell ordered the release of all Congress Working Committee members, and proposed talks to set up a new Executive Council which would be entirely Indian except for the Viceroy himself and the Commander-in-Chief.
2. Caste Hindus and Muslims would have equal representation, the Executive would work within the existing constitution (i.e., it would not be responsible to the Central Assembly), but the door would be kept open for discussions on a new Constitution once the War had been finally won. Hence, option (b) is not correct.
3. But the Conference really broke down due to Jinnahs intransigent demands that the League had an absolute right to choose all the Muslim members and that there should be a kind of communal veto in the Executive, with decisions opposed by Muslims needing a two- third majority.
4. The Congress objected to the plan as an attempt to reduce it to a Caste Hindu Party and insisted on its right to include members from all communities.
5. The Congress Shimla delegation was headed by Maulana Azad
6. Wavell dissolved the conference and thus gave the League a virtual veto which strengthened the Leagues position.",Hint 46,1,1
"With reference to the Ahmedabad mill strike of 1918, consider the following statements:1. It was over the issue of non- payment of bonus to famine-affected workers.2. Gandhiji used the weapon of hunger strike for first time.3. The strike was unsuccessful and was suppressed violently by the British.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 3 only,2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1. Ahmedabad Mill Strike 1918 was one of the initial movements led by Gandhi after his return from South Africa. There was a situation of dispute between the Mill owners and workers on the question of discontinuation of Plague Bonus once the epidemic had passed but the workers insisted it stay. The workers demanded a 50% wage hike. The Mill Owners were willing to give only 20% wage hike. Hence, statement 1 is not correct.
2. It involved cotton or textile mills of Ahmedabad.
3. Gandhi was invited by Anasuya Ben Sarabai and her brother Ambalal Sarabhai, leading mill-owner of Ahmadabad towards the cause of the mill owners. Here Gandhi used the weapon of Hunger strike for the first time. The result was that the strike was successful and the workers got a 35% wage hike. Hence, statement 2 is correct and 3 is not correct.",Hint 47,1,2
It was one of the greatest peasant agitation in the north and north eastern district of Bengal province of British India. The uprising originated due to the share cropping system that prevailed in Bengal. The central slogan of this movement was nij khamare dhan tolo.Which among the following peasant movements is best described by the above passage?,Tebhaga movement,Indigo revolt,Pabna peasant movement,Moplah rebellion,1,"1. One of the great post Second World War peasant agitation was the Tebhaga movement. It was the most extensive of all the post war agrarian agitations. The uprising originated in the share cropping system that prevailed in Bengal. By this time a new class of rural exploiters, the Jotedars, had emerged. They rented out land to landless peasants on the basis of sharing the crops in equal halves. The Jotedars exacted illegally many other privileges. The condition of peasants worsened further by inflationary war time situation and famine. In September 1946, the Bengal Provincial Kisan Sabha gave a call to implement, through mass struggle, the Flood Commission recommendations of tebhaga - two-thirds share - to the bargardars, the share croppers also known as bagehasi or adhyar, instead of the one-half share. The central slogan was nij khamare dhan tolo- i.e., sharecroppers taking the paddy to their own threshing floor and not to the jotedars house, as before, so as to enforce tebhaga.
2. Indigo revolt: Indigo Revolt (1859-60): The Indigo revolt of Bengal was directed against British planters who exploited the local peasants by forcing them to grow indigo on their lands instead of the more paying crops like rice. The planters forced the peasants to take advance sums and enter into fraudulent contracts which were the least profitable to them. It was led by Digambar Biswas and Bishnu Biswas who organised the peasants into a counter force to deal with the planters lathiyals (armed retainers).
3. Pabna Movement (1872-76): led by Shah Chandra Roy, Shambhu Pal, Khoodi Mollah and supported by B.C. Chatterjee and R.C. Dutt (1873; Pabna district, East Bengal, now in Bangladesh) the peasantry was oppressed by zamindars through frequent recourse to ejection, harassment, arbitrary enhancement of rent through ceases (abwabs) and use of force. In 1873 an Agrarian League was formed in the Yusufzahi Pargana of Pabna district, payments of enhanced rents were refused and the peasants fought the zamindars in the courts. Similar leagues were formed in the adjoining districts of Bengal.
4. Moplah Rebellion in Malabar: Moplahs were Muslim peasants settled in the Malabar region of Kerala. It was an armed uprising in 1921 against British authority and Hindu landlords. Their grievances related to lack of any security of tenure, renewal fees, high rents and other oppressive landlord exactions.",Hint 48,1,3
"Congress opposed the Government of India Act, 1935 as totally disappointing but it decided to contest the elections in 1937 with the objective:",Of showing how unpopular the Act was,To introduce radical changes in administration,To win the majority of seats in the legislative council,None of the above,1,"1. The GOI Act, 1935 could not satisfy the nationalist aspiration for both political and economic power continued to be concentrated in the hands of the British government. Foreign rule was to continue as before; only a few popularly elected ministers were to be added to the structure of British administration in India. The Congress condemned the Act as totally disappointing. The federal part of the Act was never introduced but the provincial part was soon put into operation. Bitterly opposed to the Act, the Congress thus decided to contest the elections under the new Act of 1935, though with the declared aim of showing how unpopular the Act was.
2. Hence, option (a) is correct.",Hint 49,1,1
"With reference to the Lala Lajpat Rai, consider the following statements:1. He was an active member of Arya Samaj.2. He established Servants of People Society.3. He organized the Indian League of America.Which of the statements given above are correct?","1, 2 and 3",1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 2 only,1,"1. Lala Lajpat Rai (1865-1928) was drawn into Arya Samaj, founded and led by Swami Dayanand Saraswati. Later on, he set up a Dayanand Anglo-Vedic school in Lahore.
2. As a militant nationalist he was active in the agitation against the partition of Bengal and was deported to a foreign country by the British Government. Subsequently, he went to the USA and there too, he pursued his ideals and organized the Indian League of America and edited Young India, to further the cause of Indian National Movement.
3. He also established Servant of People Society in 1921 at Lahore, which was inaugurated by Mahatma Gandhi.
4. Hence, all the statements are correct.",Hint 50,1,2
In which of the following regions Parallel governments were set up during the Quit India movement?1. Ballia2. Tamluk3. Satara4. JhansiSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 2 and 4 only","1, 2 and 3 only",3 and 4 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",2,"1. During the Quit India movement the revolutionaries set up parallel governments in Ballia, Tamluk, Satara.
2. In Ballia it was set-up by Chittu Pandey.It was the first parallel government setup in August 1942.
3. In Tamluk by Satis Samant. It also helped people during Bengal famine.
4. In Satara by Y.B Chavan and Nana Patil.It was longest running parallet government,1943 to 1945.",Hint 51,1,3
"With reference to the Sadler Commission of 1917, consider the following statements:1. It focussed on university education and overlooked primary and secondary education.2. It encouraged female education.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"1. The Sadler Commission was set up to study and report on problems of Calcutta University but its recommendations were applicable more or less to other universities also. It reviewed the entire field from school education to university education. It held the view that, for the improvement of university.
2. It made following recommendations:
# A separate board of secondary and intermediate education should be set up for administration and control of secondary and intermediate education.
# There should be less rigidity in framing university regulations.
# A university should function as centralised, unitary residential-teaching autonomous body, rather than as scattered, affiliated colleges. # Female education, applied scientific and technological education, teachers training including those for professional and vocational colleges should be extended",Hint 52,1,1
"Annie Besant was associated with setting up of :1. Bharat Stree Mahamandal, the first all- womens organisation in India.2. Hindu College in 1817.Select the correct answer using the code given below.",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,4,"1. Annie Besant along with Sarojini Naidu played leading role in the foundation of Indian Womens Association in 1917 whereas, Bharat Stree Mahamandal was the first all-womens organisation in India founded by Sarala Devi Chaudhurani in Allahabad in 1910. One of the primary goals of the organisation was to promote female education, which at that time was not well developed. The organisation opened several offices in Lahore (then part of undivided India), Allahabad, Delhi, Karachi, Amritsar, Hyderabad, Kanpur, Bankura, Hazaribagh, Midnapur and Kolkata (formerly Calcutta) to improve the situation of women all over India. Hence, option 1 is not correct.
2. Saraladevi Chaudhrani was an extraordinary female leader in action. She was one of the earliest women freedom fighters of India, who participated in the Swadeshi Movement as well as in the revolutionary movement of the country. She was born in 1872 and joined active politics in 1915. In 1915 she organized All India Revolutionary Partyand secretly assisted the revolutionaries and continued her secret activities through another group Sohard Society.
3. Rajaram Mohan Roy along with David Hare set up Hindu college in 1817. Whereas, Annie Besant laid the foundation of the Central Hindu College in Benaras in 1898 where both Hindu religion and western scientific subjects were taught. The college became the nucleus for the formation of Benaras Hindu College in 1916. Hence, option 2 is not correct.",Hint 53,1,2
Which of the following demands were put forth in Kisan Manifesto brought out in 1936?1. Complete abolition of land revenue and rent2. Security of tenure for tenants3. Recognition of peasant unions4. A living wage for agricultural labourers Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,"2, 3 and 4 only","1, 3 and 4 only","1, 2, 3 and 4",2,"A Kisan Manifesto was finalized at the All-India Kisan Committee session in Bombay and formally presented to the Congress Working Committee to be incorporated into its forthcoming manifesto for the 1937 elections. The Kisan Manifesto considerably influenced the agrarian programme adopted by the Congress at its Faizpur session, which included demands for fifty per cent reduction in land revenue and rent, a moratorium on debts, the abolition of feudal levies, security of tenure for tenants, a living wage for agricultural labourers, and the recognition of peasant unions.",Hint 54,1,3
"With reference to the Eka movement, consider the following statements:1. It was a peasant movement.2. The main grievances were the extraction of high rent and the oppression of thekedars.3. The movement did not have a leadership of its own and remained under Congress leadership.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 only,2 and 3 only,1,"Towards the end of 1921, peasant discontent resurfaced in the districts of Hardoi, Bahraich, and Sitapur in the northern part of the Unted Province. The initial thrust here was provided by Congress and Khilafat leaders and the movement grew under the name of the Eka or unity movement. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
The main grievances here related to the extraction of a rent that was generally fifty per cent higher than the recorded rent, the oppression of thekedars to whom the work of rent- collection was farmed out and the practice of share-rents. Hence, statement 2 is correct.
The Eka Movement soon developed its own grassroots leadership in the form of Madari Pasi and other low-caste leaders who were no particularly inclined to accept the discipline of non-violence that the Congress and Khilafat leaders urged. As a result, the movements contact with the nationalists diminished and it went its own way. Hence, statement 3 is not correct.",Hint 55,1,1
Which among the following was/were the factors behind the rise of peasant movements in India in 1930s?1. The Great Economic Depression2. Launch of Civil Disobedience Movement3. Establishment of All India Kisan Sabha Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1. All the given options are correct.
2. The great depression began to hit India from 1929-30 and brought the agricultural prices crashing down which dealt a severe blow to the already impoverished peasants burdened with high taxes and rents.
3. In 1930 the Indian National Congress launched the new phase of mass struggle. Civil Disobedience Movement was also launched in the atmosphere of discontent. In many parts of country it took form of a no tax and no rent campaign
4. All India Kisan Congress was established in Lucknow in 1936 which later changed its name to All India Kisan Sabha. Swami Sahajanand was elected its president and N.G. Ranga its general secretary.",Hint 56,1,2
Which among the following was/were part of Jinnahs fourteen demands?1. Provincial autonomy2. Full religiousfreedom to all communities.3. One third Muslim representation in the Central legislature.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 3",2 and 3 only,3 only,2,"The recommendations of the Nehru Report were not acceptable to Jinnah. He proposed certain amendments in the Nehru Report at the All Parties Conference held at Calcutta in 1928 but his demands were not accepted. Jinnah in 1929 gave fourteen points which were to become the basis of all future propaganda of the Muslim League.
The demands included:
Federal Constitution with residual powers to provinces. Provincial autonomy.
No constitutional amendment by the centre without the concurrence of the states constituting the Indian federation.
All legislatures and elected bodies to have adequate representation of Muslims in every province without reducing a majority of Muslims in a province to a minority or equality.
Adequate representation to Muslims in the services and in self governing bodies. One-third Muslim representation in the Central Legislature.
In any cabinet at the centre or in the provinces, onethird to be Muslims. Separate electorates.
No bill or resolution in any legislature to be passed if three-fourths of a minority community consider such a bill or resolution to be against their interests.
Any territorial redistribution not to affect the Muslim majority in Punjab, Bengal and NWFP. Separation of Sindh from Bombay.
Constitutional reforms in the NWFP and Baluchistan. Full religious freedom to all communities.
Protection of Muslim rights in religion, culture, education and language.",Hint 57,1,3
"With reference to the Tana Bhagat movement, consider the following statements:1. It was a tribal uprising under the leadership of Jatra Oraon.2. It was against the exploitation of zamindars.Which of the statements given above are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"1.Tana Bhagat movement in Chhotanagpur reflected the aspirations of the Oraon tribals for deliverance from the exploitation of zamindars and mahajans under the leadership of Jatra Bhagat and Turia Bhagat. Hence, statements 1 and 2 are correct.
2.The Tana Bhagats opposed the taxes imposed on them by the British and they staged a Satyagraha (civil disobedience movement) even before Gandhis satyagraha movement",Hint 58,1,1
Why did Gandhiji choose salt as symbol of protest during the Civil Disobedience Movement?1. Salt tax affected all sections of the population2. Salt issue would unify all political party in India3. Salt tax did not threaten government financesSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,2 only,"1, 2 and 3",1 and 3 only,3,"Salt was chosen as central formula during a Salt Satyagrah as salt tax seemed to be the most crucial one for many reasons:
1. It affected all sections of the population and had no divisive implication.
2. It did not threaten government finances or any vested interests and therefore would not alienate any of the non-Congress political elements, nor would provoke government repression.
3. It could be made into a highly emotive issue with great publicity value.
Gandhi said, ? There is no other article like salt, outside water, by taxing which the government can reach the starving millions, the sick, the maimed and the utterly helpless, it was most inhuman poll tax the ingenuity of man can devise
Hence, all the statements are correct.",Hint 59,1,2
"Consider the following statements regarding Nehru report:1. Its provision applied to both British India and Princely states.2. It was approved during Lahore session of Congress, 19293. It was opposed by the Jawahar Lal Nehru and Subhash chandra Bose.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.Statement 1 is not correct: The Nehru report confined itself to British India, as it envisaged the future link up of British India with the Princely states on a federal basis.
2.Nehru report was approved in the Calcutta session of Congress, December 1928. But the younger sections of Congress led by Jawahar Lal Nehru and Subhash Bose were opposed the report as they were not statisfied with the dominion status as the goal of Congress.
Instead they demanded complete independence as a goal of Congress. Hence, statement 2 is not correct and 3 is correct.",Hint 60,1,3
Consider the following statements regarding the 1945-46 elections in India:1. There was a strong communal character in the pattern of voting.2. The elections were conducted on the basis of universal adult franchise.3. The Hindu Mahasabha established itself as a dominant party among non-muslims in these elections.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,2 and 3 only,2 only,"1, 2 and 3",1 only,4,"1.The Congress did win massively in the general (i.e., non-Muslim) constituencies, capturing 57 out of 102 seats in the Central Assembly (against 36 in 1934) and 91.3% of non-Muslim votes. In the provinces, it won majorities everywhere except Bengal, Sind and Punjab. oThe Hindu Mahasabha was routed and the Communists, too, did badly, capturing only a handful of provincial seats (3 in Bengal, including Jyoti Basu from a labour constituency, 2 in Bombay, and 2 in Madras). Hence, statement 3 is not correct.
2.The Muslim Leagues success in the Muslim seats was equally spectacular—all 30 reserved constituencies in the centre with 86.6% of Muslim votes, and 442 out 509 Muslim seats in the provinces. Unlike 1937, it had now clearly established itself as the dominant party among Muslims.
3.The most significant feature of the elections, was the prevalence of communal voting, in sharp contrast to the sporadic but very striking anti- British unity forged often in the preceding months in the streets of Calcutta, Bombay, or even Karachi during the INA agitations.
Hence, statement 1 is correct
4.The franchise was extremely limited – Only about 10% population in the provinces and less than 10% in the Central Assembly. This, along with separate electorates may have been the reasons for the disparity between unity before elections and communal nature of election results. Hence, statement 2 is not correct.",Hint 61,1,1
"With reference to the Self-respect movement, consider the following statements:1. It was led by Jyotiba Phule.2. It aimed at rejection of Brahminical religion and culture.3. It involved formalizing of weddings without Brahmin priests.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.The Self-respect movement was led by E.V. Ramasamy (also called as Periyar), in the mid-1920s. The movement aimed at nothing short of a rejection of the brahmanical religion and culture which Periyar felt was the prime instrument of exploitation of the lower castes. He sought to undermine the position of Brahmin priests by formalizing weddings without Brahmin priests. Hence, only statements 2 and 3 are correct.",Hint 62,1,2
Consider the following statements with reference to Mountbatten Plan:1. It sought to give dominion status to India and Pakistan.2. It provided for the setting up of Boundary Commission.3. The plan lacked any provision for conducting a referendum to determine which sides a region would go to.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"The Mountbatten Plan, as the 3rd June, 1947 Plan came to be known, sought to effect an early transfer of power on the basis of Dominion Status to two successor states, India and Pakistan.
Congress was willing to accept Dominion Status for a while because it felt it must assume full power immediately and meet boldly the explosive situation in the country.
The salient features of the Mountbatten plan were as follows:
oMuslim-dominated areas may be separated to form a Dominion. In that case such a domination would be constituted by a partition of Bengal and Punjab.
oA referendum in North-west Frontier Province would decide whether it should join Pakistan or not.
oSimilarly the people of Sylhet, in Assam, were also to give their verdict in a referendum whether they were willing to join the Muslim area in Bengal.
oA Boundary Commission was to define the boundaries of the Hindu and Muslim Provinces in the Punjab and Bengal oThe British Parliament was to legislate an Act for the immediate transfer of Power.
oThe representatives of the Muslim-dominated areas could form a separate Constitution-making body or Constituent Assembly.",Hint 63,1,3
"With reference to the Swarajaya Party, consider the following statements:1. It was set up at the Gaya session of Indian National Congress.2. It aimed to obstruct the proceedings of legislative councils.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"The Swarajaya Party was a political party formed in India in March 1923. The Gaya session of INC (December 1922) rejected council entry and did not provide for setting up of Swarajya Party. Hence, statement 1 is not correct.
Its main objective was to enter the legislative council with a view to obstructing their functioning. The important leaders were Chittaranjan Das, Motilal Nehru, Vithalbhai Patel and Hakim Ajmal Khan. Hence, statement 2 is correct.",Hint 64,1,1
Consider the following statements regarding All India State People Conference:1. Its objective was to raise moderate demands for democratic rights and constitutional changes in Princely States.2. It was formed by the Indian National Congress with its headquarter at Bombay.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"1.A national body called the All India States Peoples Conference,founded in 1927 with its headquarters at Bombay with the objective to coordinate political activities in different states and also to raise moderate demands for democratic rights and constitutional changes in Princely States. The men chiefly responsible for its formation were Balwantrai Mehta, Manikial Kothari and G.R. Abhayankar. It was an independent organisation and not formed by Indian National Congress.
2.Hence, statement 1 is correct and 2 is not correct.",Hint 65,1,2
Consider the following statements regarding Bhulabhai Desai:1. He was a member of the Central Legislative Assembly.2. He appeared for the defence of the officers of the Indian National Army accused of treachery against British.3. He joined the Home rule league movement led by Annie Besant.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,"1, 2 and 3",2 and 3 only,2 only,1 only,1,"1.Bhulabhai Desai was one of the well known Indian freedom fighters and an independence activist. He was also an acclaimed lawyer. Desai is well renowned for his defense of the 3 prime officers of the Indian National Army (INA), also known as the Azad Hind Fauj, namely Colonel Gurbaksh Singh Dhillon, General Shah Nawaz Khan and Colonel Prem Kumar Sahgal,who were accused of treachery against the British sovereign during the Second World War. Bhulabhai Desai also tried to negotiate a covert power sharing agreement with Liaquat Ali Khan, one of the leading founding members of present Pakistan, of the Muslim League.
2.Bhulabhai Desai started his political career after he joined the All India Home Rule League, led by Annie Besant. He also became a member of the Indian Liberal Party, which supported the influences of the British. But he opposed the all-European Simon Commission, which was established in the year 1928 by the British Government of India in order to devise constitutional reforms in the country.
3.His association with the Indian National Congress Party started when he stood for the farmers of Gujarat in the inquiry by the British administration after the Bardoli Satyagraha in the year 1928. Bhulabhai Desai officially became a member of the Indian National Congress in the year1930.
4.He founded the Swadeshi Sabha with the aim of supporting the boycott of foreign goods. He aimed to build a boycott by Indian companies of foreign goods and thus persuaded eighty textile mills to join the movement. The British authorities announced that the Swadeshi Sabha unlawful and illegal and arrested Desai for his activities in the year 1932.
5.In November 1934, Bhulabhai Desai was elected to the Central Legislative Assembly from Gujarat. He took active participation in the Satyagraha which was initiated by Mahatma Gandhi (Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi).
6.Under the Defense of India Act, he was detained by the British Indian Police on 10th December 1940 and was imprisoned in Yerwada Central Jail. Due to severe health problems, Bhulabhai Desai was released from Yerwada Central Jail in September 1941.",Hint 66,1,3
"With reference to the Simon Commission, consider the following statements:1. It recommended the replacement of dyarchy with responsible government in the provinces.2. Indians protested against the commission as there was no Indian member in the commission.3. Lala Hardayal died during the protest of Simon commission.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",2 only,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"Statement 1 is correct: The Government of India Act 1919 had introduced the system of dyarchy to govern the provinces of British India. However, the Indian public clamoured for revision of the difficult dyarchy form of government, and the Government of India Act 1919 itself stated that a commission would be appointed after 10 years to investigate the progress of the governance scheme and suggest new steps for reform. The Indian Statutory Commission was a group of seven British Members of Parliament they had been dispatched to India in 1927 to study constitutional reform in that colony. It was commonly referred to as the Simon Commission after its chairman, Sir John Simon. Simon Commission recommended the replacement of dyarchy with responsible government in the provinces, which was done in 1935.
Provisions of the Commission:
There should be a constitutional reconstruction It would be a federal constitution.
The provinces should be given full autonomy including law.
The governor should have discretionary power to relate to internal security and administrative powers to protect the different communities. The number of members of provincial legislative council should be increased.
Governor-general should have complete power to appoint the members of the cabinet. The government of India should have complete control over the high court.
Statement 2 is correct: Indians protested against the commission as there was no Indian member in the commission.
Statement 3 is not correct: Lala Lajpat Rai died due to brutal lathi-charge when he was leading an anti- Simon Commission demonstration at Lahore on 30 October 1928. Lala Hardayal died in 1939.",Hint 67,1,1
The February Declaration by British Prime Minister Clement Attlee was made in relation to,Seeking cooperation of Indians during the world war,Seeking participation of Congress in the Round Table Conferences,Call upon Gandhiji to break his fast during the Quit India movement,Transfer of power from Britain to India.,4,"February 20, 1947 Declaration by Attlee set a deadline for June 30, 1948 for transfer of power. It proposed to go ahead with the transfer even if the Indian politicians had not agreed by that time on the constitution. The British would relinquish power either to some form of central government or in some areas to the existing provincial governments if the constituent assembly was not fully representative i.e. - if the Muslim majority provinces did not join.</span",Hint 68,1,2
The famous Gandhi-Irwin pact of 1931 was described as a truce and a provisional statement. Which of the following statements is true about the agreement?,The right to make salt for consumption and sale was accorded to all coastal villages.,Civil Disobedience Movement was discontinued after the pact.,The agreement did not mention anything about the political prisoners of Civil Disobedience Movement.,The pact was signed by Jawahar Lal Nehru on behalf of Gandhiji.,2,"Gandhi Irwin pact was signed byGandhiji on behalf of the Congress and by Lord Irwin on behalf of the Government. The terms of agreement included the immediate release of all political prisoners not convicted for violence.
The Govt. also conceded the right to make salt for consumption to villages along the coast. The Congress on its part, agreed to discontinue the Civil Disobedience Movement.
It was also understood that the Congress would participate in the next Round Table Conference.",Hint 69,1,3
Which of the following organizations/newspapers is/are associated with Mahatma Gandhis struggle in South Africa?1.Indian Natal Organization2.Indian Opinion3.Passive Resistance Organization4.The Indian League5.Indian MirrorSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 3 and 5 only","2, 4 and 5 only","1, 2, 3, 4 and 5",1,"Indian Natal Organisation was formed in 1893 by Mahatma Gandhi to infuse a strong sense of solidarity into the Indiancommuntiy of Natal against the proposed bill of the Natal government to disfranchise Indians.
Indian opinion was a weekly newspaper started in 1903, which became a mouth-piece of Gandhis struggle in South Africa. Passive Resistance organisation was setup in 1907 to protest against the Asiatic Bill passed by the Transvaallegislatrue. It urged people to boycott permit offices.
The Indian League was started in 1875 bySisir Kumar Ghosh with the object of stimulating the sense of nationalism amongst the people and of encouraging political education. It was not associated with Mahatma Gandhis struggle in South Africa. Indian Mirror was anenglish paper founded byDevendranath Tagore, at Calcutta in 1862.",Hint 70,1,1
"With reference to August Offer, 1940, consider the following statements:1.It for the first time recognized the right of the Indians to frame a Constitution.2.It laid down the dominion status as the objective for India3.It strengthened the Muslim Leagues position for the demand to have a separate state for Muslims.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"August offer marked an advance over the existing state of things by recognizing the natural right to determine the form of constitution and explicitly promised dominion status. However, it reaffirmed that full weight to minority opinion, which virtually endorsed the Muslim Leagues demand of separate state for Muslims on which account the congress rejected the offer. For obvious reason Muslim League welcomed the offer.",Hint 71,1,2
"Which of the following was not a feature of the Indian Independence Act, 1947?","It was based on the Mountbatten Plan of 3rd June, 1947.",The authority of the British Crown over Princely States to continue till the formation of Constitution.,"India and Pakistan to be governed by Government of India Act 1935, till the constitution was made.","Lord Mountbatten continued as the Governor General of India, but not of Pakistan.",2,"The Indian Independence Act was based upon the Mountbatten plan of 3rd June 1947 and was passed by the British parliament on July 5, 1947. It received royal assent on July 18, 1947.
It provided for two dominion states: India and Pakistan. The boundaries between the two dominion states were to be determined by a Boundary Commission which was headed by Sir Cyril Radcliff. The authority of the British Crown over the princely states ceased and they were free to join either India or Pakistan or remain independent. Both the dominions of India and Pakistan were to have Governor Generals to be appointed by the British King. The act also provided for a common Governorgeneral if both of them agreed. The constituent assemblies of both the states were free to make constitutions of their respective countries. For the time being till the constitution was made, both of them would be governed in accordance with the Government of India act 1935. Those civil servants who had been appointed before the August 15, 1947, will continue in service with same privileges.",Hint 72,1,3
Consider the following statements regarding Neel Darpan :1.It was written by Dinbandhu Mitra.2.It depicted the atrocities of the indigo planters in Bihar.3.It did not get wide attention and remained confined to local circles.Which of the statements given above is/are correct ?,1 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"NeelDarpan (literally, blue mirror) was published byDinabandhuMitra which depicted the atrocities of the indigo planters in Bengal. The play received wide attention and was translated intoEnglish by Michael Madhusudan Dutta. It succeeded in bringing the peasant issue to the wider arena of institutional politics and this resulted in a growing pressure on the planters to behave. By 1863, indigo cultivation shifted from Bengal to Bihar.",Hint 73,1,1
"Wavell Plan was proposed in 1945 to reconstruct the Governor Generals Executive Council. Which among the following were proposals under the Plan ?1.With the exception of governor-general, all members of the executive -council were to be Indians.2.Hindus and Muslims were to have equal representation.3.Governor General was to exercise his veto on the advice of ministers.Select the correct answer using the code given below.",1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"Wavell Plan was proposed to reconstruct thegoverner generals executive council pending the preparation of a newconstitution.The main proposals were
1.With the exception of the governor-general and the commander-in-chief, all members of the executive council were to be Indians. 2.Hindus and Muslims were to have equal representation.
3.The reconstructed council was to function as an interim government within the framework of 1935 Act 4.Governor General was to exercise his veto on the advice of ministers.
5. Representatives of different parties were to submit a joint list to the viceroy for nominations to theexective council. If a joint list was not possible the separate lists were to be submitted.
6. Possibilities were to be kept open for negotiations on a new constitution once that war was finally won",Hint 74,1,2
"With reference to Indian National Army, consider the following statements:1.It was formed after the failure of Quit India movement.2.The idea of the INA was first conceived in Malaya by Subhash Chandra Bose.3.The INA was raised by the Japanese Army and supported by them till Indias Independence.Which of the statements given above is/are correct ?","1, 2 and 3 only",1 only,2 and 3 only,None,4,"The idea of the INA was first conceived in Malaya by Mohan Singh, an Indian officer of the British Indian Army, when he decided not to join the retreating British army and instead went to the Japanese for help. The Japanese had till then only encouraged civilian Indians to form anti-British organizations, but had no conception of forming a military wing consisting of Indians. Indian prisoners of war were handed over by the Japanese to Mohan Singh who then tried to recruit them into an Indian National Army. The fall of Singapore was crucial, for this brought 45,000 Indian POWs into Mohan Singhs sphere of influence. By the end of 1942, forty thousand men expressed their willingness to join the INA. The INA was also seen by many as a means of checking the misconduct of the Japanese against Indians in South-East Asia and a bulwark against a future Japanese occupation of India. The outbreak of the Quit India Movement gave a fillip to the INA as well. Anti-British demonstrations were organized in Malaya. On 1 September 1942 the first division of the INA was formed with 16,300 men. The Japanese were by now more amenable to the idea of an armed Indian wing because they were contemplating an Indian invasion. But, by December 1942, serious differences emerged between the Indian army officers led by Mohan Singh and the Japanese over the role that the INA was to play. Mohan Singh andNiranjan Singh Gill, the senior-most Indian officer to join the INA, were arrested. The Japanese, it turned out, wanted only a token force of 2,000 men, while Mohan Singh wanted to raise an Indian National Army of 20,000.",Hint 75,1,3
"Consider the following statements regarding the Delhi Proposals, 1927:1.It demanded to appoint a special committee to enquire upon status of Muslims.2.It demanded to make Sind a separate province.3.It demanded equal representation of Muslims as Hindus in the Central Legislature.Which of the statements given above are correct?",1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,2 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"A large number of Muslim leaders had assembled in Delhi in December, 1927 to make a joint proposal to the British Government about Muslim interests. They made 4 proposals which are commonly known as Delhi Proposal.
Sind should be made a separate province. The North-West Frontier Province should be treated equal as other province. Muslims should have 33.3% representation in Central Legislature
In Punjab and Bengal, the proportion of representation should be in accordance with the population.",Hint 76,1,1
Which of the following statements is/are correct regarding the Capitalist and business class during the Indian National movement?1.The Capitalist Class opposed the Swadeshi movement and Non-cooperation movement but openly supported Civil Disobedience movement.2.FICCI participated in the First Round Table Conference.3.Capitalists supported the government in Public Safety Bill intended to contain communists.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"During Swadeshi Movement the Capitalists remained opposed to the boycott agitation. Even during the Non Cooperation Movement, some of the Capitalists openly declared themselves enemies of the Non Cooperation Movement. However, during the 1930s Civil Disobedience Movement, the Capitalists largely supported the Movement. Hence 1st Statement is correct. FICCI did not
participate in the first round table conference because in their opinion unless the Round Table Conference was attended by Mahatma Gandhi. Hence, 2nd Statement is incorrect. The capitalists did not support the government in introduction of public safety bill since it intended to contain communists. Hence 3rd Statement is incorrect.",Hint 77,1,2
What were the reasons for the starting of Quit India Movement?1.Rising prices of essential commodities.2.Fear of Japanese invasion.3.Failure of August Offer.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,1 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,The failure of Cripps Mission to solve the deadlock exposed Britishs unchanged attitude on constitutional advance and made it clear that any more silence would be tantamount to accepting the British right to decide the fate of Indians,Hint 78,1,3
Gandhiji used the term Himalayan Blunder in the context of,Rowlatt Act Satyagraha,Non Cooperation Movement,Civil Disobedience Movement,Quit India Movement,1,"The term Himalayan Blunder was used in the context ofRowlatt Act. By mid-April theRowlatt Satyagraha had started losing momentum, forcing Gandhi to withdraw it. As a political campaign, therefore, it was a manifest failure, since it failed to secure its only aim, i.e., the repeal of theRowlatt Act. It also lapsed into violence, although it was meant to be non-violent. Gandhi admitted to have committed a Himalayan blunder by offering the weapon ofsatyagraha to a people insufficiently trained in the discipline of non-violence. But the movement was significant nevertheless, as it was the first nationwide popular agitation, marking the beginning of a transformation of Indian nationalist politics from being the politics of some restricted classes to becoming the politics of the masses.",Hint 79,1,1
What among the following is Direct Action Day in the context of Modern Indian History?,"After withdrawing its acceptance from the Cabinet Mission plan, the Muslim League observed this day which led to communal riots.","Dandi march day, the direct action campaign of tax resistance which triggered the widespread Civil Disobedience Movement.","Individual Satyagraha day, which was aimed at affirming Right of Speech, which led to the Quit India Movement of 1942.",The day of partition on which British India was divided into India and Pakistan.,1,"The Direct Action was announced by the Muslim League Council to show the strength of Muslim feelings both to British and Congress because Muslims feared that if the British left, Muslims wouldsurely suffer at the hands of overwhelming Hindu majority, which resulted in the worst communal riots that British India had seen. Jinnah had announced 16 August 1946 would be Direct Action Day for the purpose of winning the separate Muslim state.",Hint 80,1,2
Consider the following statements regarding women participation in the Indian freedom struggle:1.Kalpana Dutt shot dead Governor of Bengal while receiving her degree.2.Sarojini Naidu led Civil Disobedience Movement at Dharsana Salt Works.3.Usha Mehta started an underground radio in Bombay during Quit India Movement.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 and 3 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,KalpanaDutt helped Surya Sen inrevolutionary activities. Bina Das who shot at point-blank range at the Governor of Bengal while receiving her degree. So option 1 is incorrect.Sarojini Naidu along withManilal Gandhi took the unfinished task on leading a raid onDharsana Salt works. So option 2 is correct. Usha Mehta started an underground radio in Bombay during Quit India Movement. So option 3 is correct.,Hint 81,1,3
"Which of the following statements is/are correct regarding the Salt Satyagrahas during Civil Disobedience movement?1.In Tamil Nadu, Salt march from Trichinopoly to Vedaranniyam was led by Subramania Bharati.2.In Malabar, the salt march from Calicut to Payannur was led by K. Kelappan.3.Raid on Dharasana salt work was led by Sarojini Naidu.Select the correct answer from the code given below.",1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"In Tamil Nadu Saltmarch from Trichinopoly toVedaranniyam was led by Rajagopalachari. The other two statements are correct. Also, theDharasana salt work was led bySarojini NaidualongwithAbulKalam Azad.",Hint 82,1,1
"Which of the following tribal and peasant movements had element of messianic movement, that is, the leaders claimed to have supernatural powers against the Britishers?1.Ulugan Rebellion2.Santhal Rebellion3.Mappila Revolt4.Kuka RevoltSelect the correct answer using the code given below.",1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 4 only","1, 2, 3 and 4",3,"Tribal and Peasant revolt were often against the local grievances against the administrative changes made by thebritish. Tribal movements were often messianici.e, some leader out of them claimed to have some divine powers handed over to them by the god themselves.
Popular revolt ofUlugan or Munda whereBirsa Munda claimed himself to be the divine messenger of god toSanthal rebellion whereSido &kanhu announcing their tribal members to be in possession of supernatural powers which would makebrisitsh bullets ineffective.
Peasant movement were hardly under the influence of these superstitious statements of their leaders with exception tokuka Revolt ofpeasantsin Punjableb by Baba Ram Singh.",Hint 83,1,2
"With reference to Gandhis Eleven Point Ultimatum for administrative reforms to Lord Irwin, consider the following statements:1.He declared that there would be no civil disobedience and the Congress would participate in any conference if these demands were met.2.Apart from general demands, it also made bourgeois specific and peasant specific demands.Which of the statements given above is/are correct ?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"Gandhiji placed Eleven Point Ultimatum to Irwin for administrative reforms. He declared that there would be no civil disobedience and the Congress would participate in any conference if these demands were met.
It was a compromise formula which included-Issues of General Interest 1.Reduce expenditure on Army & civil services
2. Introduce total prohibition.
3. Carry out reforms in Criminal Investigation Department (C.I.D) 4.Change Arms Act allowing popular control of issue of licences. 5.Release political prisoners
6.Accept Postal Reservation Bill 7.Specific bourgeois demands 8.Reduce rupee-sterling exchange ratio 9.Introduce textile protection 10.Reserve coastal shipping for Indians. 11.Specific peasant demands 12.Reduce land revenue
13.Abolish salt tax",Hint 84,1,3
"Satyagraha Sabha, which was established by Mahatma Gandhi, is associated with which of the following ?",Kheda Satyagraha,Rowlatt Satyagraha,Non-Cooperation Movement,Bardoli Satyagraha,2,"Satyagraha Sabha was established by M. Gandhi duringRowlatt Satyagraha. He toured the country to educate the people in the implications of the Satyagraha pledge and founded a new organization, the Satyagraha Sabha.",Hint 85,1,1
Which of the following conspiracy cases is/are not associated with Communist Movement in British India?1.Peshawar Conspiracy Case2.Kanpur Conspiracy Case3.Meerut Conspiracy CaseSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 2 and 3",1 only,2 and 3 only,None,4,"The Communist Movement attracted notice by its being involved in Peshawar Conspiracy Case (1922-23), Kanpur Conspiracy Case (1924) and Meerut Conspiracy Case (1929-33).
Peshawar Conspiracy Case - Peshawar Conspiracy case is related to the Muslims taking interest in the Communist revolution of Russia. Many Muslims from Peshawar went to Moscow and started getting training related to Military and Communist regimes. When they returned to create disturbances, the Government caught them on the way. Many of them were sentenced to long imprisonment.
Kanpur Conspiracy Case - Kanpur Conspiracy Case was also against the communists which were abhorred by the British Government. Some newly turned communists named M N Roy,MuzaffarAhamed, SADange,ShaukatUsmani,Nalini Gupta,SingaraveluChettiar, Ghulam Hussain were caught by the Government and were tried for conspiring against the Government. In this case, M N Roy was charged in absentia, so he was not arrested. Ghulam Hussain turned a British informer and was pardoned. Rest all people were arrested and sent to jail for 4 years. Meerut Conspiracy Case - It continued for over three and a half years and attracted worldwide publicity. It resulted in conviction ofMuzaffar Ahmed,Dange,Joglekar, Spratt, Bradley,Usmani and others. For the Meerut Trial, the defence case was pleaded by eminent nationalists like J.L. Nehru, K.N.Katju and F.H. Ansari.
By 1934, the Communist movement in India acquired some respectability.",Hint 86,1,2
"With reference to Khudai Khidmatgar movement, consider the following statements :1.It was started by Khan Abdul Gaffar Khan.2.It was a non-violent movement.3.It started during Quit India Movement.Which of the statements given above is/are correct ?",1 only,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,3 only,2,"In 1929, theKhudaiKhidmatgars (Servants of God) movement, led by Khan AbdulGhaffar Khan, was started to oppose the British in Indias Northwest Frontier Province non-violently.Ghaffar Khan and theKhudaiKhidmatgar movement inspired thousands of Pashtuns (also calledPathans), who were known as fierce warriors, and others to lay down their arms and use civil resistance to challenge British rule.
Thus only statement 3 is wrong.",Hint 87,1,3
Which of the following initiatives was/were taken during Swadeshi movement to encourage national education?1.Establishment of Shantiniketan by Rabindranath Tagore.2.Establishment of Bengal National College and Bengal Technical Institute.3.Establishment of National Council of Education.4.Implementation of Wardha Scheme of Education.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 2 and 4 only",1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,3 and 4 only,3,"One of the major planks of the programme of Swadeshi was national education. In 1901 Rabindranath Tagore had established a co- educational school inside the premises of the ashram, before the Swadeshi movement. Taking a cue from TagoresShantiniketan, the Bengal National College was founded, withAurobindo as the principal.
For technical education, the Bengal Technical Institute was set up and funds were raised to send students to Japan for advanced learning. In August 1906, the National Council of Education was established, which aimed to organize a system of Education Literary, Scientific and Technical on National lines and under National control from the primary to the university level.
Wardha Scheme of Education was formulated in 1937 at All India National Education Conference.",Hint 88,1,1
The 1938 Haripura Congress session is considered a landmark because? ,The National Planning Committee was set up under Jawahar Lal Nehru.,The movements in Princely States received the support from the Congress.,Congress adopted a socialistic pattern of development as the goal of the party.,Subhas Chandra Bose defeated Gandhis candidate Pattabhi Sitaramayya in the Congress elections. ,1,"1938 (Haripura Session) - National Planning Committee was set up under the chairmanship of Jawaharlal Nehru. 1955(Avadi Session) - Through theAvadi Resolution, a socialistic pattern of development was adopted as the goal of the party.
1939 (Tripuri Session) - In the presidential elections of Congress, Netaji defeatedSitaramayya",Hint 89,1,2
With reference to the Constituent Assembly of India consider the following statements:1.The constituent assembly was formed on the basis of Cabinet Mission Plan.2.The selection of representatives of various Indian states was flexible and decided by consultation.3.The members of the constituent assembly were directly elected by the people of un-divided India.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"The Constituent Assembly was constituted in November 1946 under the scheme formulated by the Cabinet Mission Plan. The features of the scheme were: 1.The total strength of the Constituent Assembly was to be 389. Of these, 296 seats were to be allotted to British India and 93 seats to the Princely States. Out of 296 seats allotted to the British India, 292 members were to be drawn from the eleven governors provinces and four from the four chief commissioners provinces3, one from each. 2. Each province and princely state (or group of states in case of small states) were to be allotted seats in proportion to their respective population. Roughly, one seat was to be allotted for every million population. 3. Seats allocated to each British province were to be decided among the three principal communities—Muslims, Sikhs and general (all except Muslims and Sikhs), in proportion to their population.4.The representatives of each community were to be elected by members of that community in the provincial legislative assembly and voting was to be by the method of proportional representation by means of single transferable vote. 5. The representatives of princely states were to be nominated by the heads of the princely states. It is thus clear that the Constituent Assembly was to be a partly elected and partly nominated body.
Moreover, the members were to be indirectly elected by the members of the provincial assemblies, who themselves were elected on a limited franchise. The elections to the Constituent Assembly (for 296 seats allotted to the British Indian Provinces) were held in July–August 1946. The Indian National Congress won 208 seats, the Muslim League 73 seats, and the small groups and independents got the remaining 15 seats. However, the 93 seats allotted to the princely states were not filled as they decided to stay away from the Constituent
Assembly. Although the Constituent Assembly was not directly elected by the people of India on the basis of adult franchise, the Assembly comprised representatives of all sections of Indian Society—Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs,Parsis, Anglo–Indians, Indian Christians, SCs, STs including women of all these sections. The Assembly included all important personalities of India at that time, with the exception of Mahatma Gandhi and MA Jinnah.",Hint 90,1,3
"With reference to dominion status, consider the following statements:1.Nehru Report demanded dominion status.2.Cripps Mission proposed dominion status.3.India became a dominion before gaining independence.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"The Indian Independence Act provided for creation of two independent dominions of India and Pakistan with effect from August 15, 1947. It remained a dominion till it turned into a Republic on January 26, 1950.
Nehru Report recommended dominion status on lines of self-governing dominions as the form of government desired by Indians",Hint 91,1,1
"With reference to Lahore Session of Congress, 1929, consider the following statements:1.It was decided to boycott the first Round Table conference .2.Congress working committee was authorised to launch a programme of civil disobedience.3.In this session 26 January, 1930 fixed as first Independence day.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,In Lahore session of congress 1929 complete independence was declared as the goal of congress and CWC were authorised to launch civil disobedience movement to achieve this. Also decision to boycott first RTC was taken. So all options are correct.,Hint 92,1,2
"Which of the following statements is/are true about the events aftermath of suspension of Non Cooperation Movement?1.At the Gaya session of 1922 of Congress, no-changers were defeated by pro-changers.2.The group of Congress who wanted to stick to the Gandhian programme formed the Congress-Khilafat-Swaraj Pary.3.Swaraj party did not dissociate itself from the Congress.4.Swaraj party was able to build a common political front with the support of Liberals and Jinnah in Central Legislative Assembly.Select the correct answer using the code given below.",1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 4 only","1, 3 and 4 only",3 and 4 only,4,"A new line of political activity, which would keep up the spirit of resistance to colonial rule, was now advocated by C. R. Das andMotilal Nehru. They suggested that the nationalists should end the boycott of the legislative councils, enter them, expose them as sham parliaments and as a mask which the bureaucracy has put on, and obstruct every work of the council. This, they argued, would not be giving up non-cooperation but continuing it in a more effective form by extending it to the councils themselves. It would be opening a new front in the battle. C.R. Das as the President of the Congress andMotilal as its Secretary put forward this programme of either mending or ending the councils at the Gaya session of the Congress in December 1922. Another section of the Congress, headed byVallabhbhai Patel,Rajendra Prasad and C. Rajagopalachari, opposed the new proposal which was consequently defeated by 1748 to 890 votes. Das andMotilal resigned from their respective offices in the Congress and on 1 January 1923 announced the formation of the Congress- Khilafat Swaraj Party better known later as the Swaraj Party. Das was the President andMotilal one of the Secretaries of the new party.
The adherents of thecouncilentry programme came to be popularly known as pro-changers and those still advocating boycott of the councils as no—changers. On 6 November 1924,Gandhiji brought the strife between theSwarajists and no-changers to an end, by signing a joint statement with Das andMotilal that theSwarajist Party would carry on work in the legislatures on behalf of the Congress and as an integral part of the Congress. This decision wasndorsed in December at the Belgaum session of the Congress over whichGandhiji presided. He also gave theSwarajists a majority of seats on his Working Committee. In the Central Legislative Assembly, theSwarajists succeeded in building a common political front with the Independents led by M.A. Jinnah, the Liberals, and individuals such as Madan MohanMalaviya. They built similar coalitions in most of the provinces. And they set out to inflict defeat after defeat on the Government.",Hint 93,1,3
The Santhal or Hool rebellion took place at Daman-i-koh. Area covering Daman-i-koh is?,Chota Nagpur Plateau,Area along Rajmahal hills,Area between Bhagalpur and Rajmahal,Area between Chota Nagpur Plateau and Bhagalpur.,3,"Thesanthal orhool rebellion was led bySido &kanhu.
It took place at Daman-i-koh which is a tribal name of the area lying between Bhagalpur andRajmahal. The scale of the rebellion was massive aimed to expel thedoutsiders-thedikus.",Hint 94,1,1
"With reference to Wavell plan, consider the following statements :1.The Governor General Executive council was to function as an interim government within the framework of 1935 Act.2.The plan was accepted by Muslim league but rejected by Congress.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"The main proposals of Wavellplan :
Except Governorgeneral and commander in chief all other members of the executive council were to be Indians Hindus and Muslims were to have equal representation
The reconstructed council were to be function under 1935 act. Governorgeneral was to exercise his veto on the advice of minister
Possibilities wereto kept open for negotiation on a new constitution once the war was own.
However, the plan was rejected by both Muslim league and Congress. Muslim league was of fear that it will reduce to minority status in the council because of common interest of other minorities with congress, while congress rejected it as the plan put the congress in pure Hindu image.",Hint 95,1,2
What did the Tanzeem and Tabligh movements aimed for?,To create a nationalistic militant force among Muslims.,To have communal consolidation and do religious conversions.,To impart liberal ideology among Muslim Youths.,To fight for the formation of an independent Pakistan.,2,"TheTanzeem andTabligh movements were started among Muslims in different parts of the countries in one form or the other. These were the counterparts ofSangathan andShuddhi movements pioneered by Arya
Samajis among the Hindus. These movements aimed to enhance the communalization among the Muslim population and give way to religious Conversion.",Hint 96,1,3
"With reference to the Constituent Assembly, consider the following statements:1.Dr. Rajendra Prasad was the first President of the Constituent Assembly.2.The Constituent Assembly existed till the first general elections in Independent India.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 onl,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,4,"The idea of Constituent assembly of India
was first put forward by MN Roy in 1934. In 1935, it became the official demand of INC. It was accepted in August 1940 in the August Offer however, constituted under the Cabinet Mission plan 1946. It was first elected for undivided India but after partition, some of its members ceased to exist as a separate constituent assembly was created for Pakistan. Members of Constituent Assembly were indirectly elected. During British Era, India had provincial assemblies like the current legislative assemblies of states. The members of the Constituent assembly were indirectly elected by the members of the provincial assemblies by method of single transferable vote system of proportional representations.
The first meeting of the Constituent Assembly of India took place in Constitutional Hall, New Delhi, on 9th December 1946. Dr.Sachchidananda Sinha was the first president of the Constituent Assembly.
The Constituent assembly set for total 11 sessions. The Constitution of India was adopted on 26 November, 1949 and the members appended their signatures to it on 24 January, 1950. Constitution of India came into force on 26 January, 1950. On that day, the Constituent Assembly ceased to exist, transforming itself into the Provisional Parliament of India until a new Parliament was constituted in 1952 via general elections..",Hint 97,1,1
Which of the following statements is correct in the context of federal assembly proposed by government of India Act?,The upper house was to be indirectly elected and lower house to be directly elected.,The upper house was to be directly elected and lower house to be indirectly elected.,Both the houses to be directly elected.,Both the houses to be indirectly elected.,2,"A peculiar system was introduced by the Government of India Act, 1935. In the federal assembly proposed by the Act, theoretically the more popular Lower house was designed to be elected indirectly. On the other hand, the upper house was set to be directly elected. This was a deviation from the general practice.",Hint 98,1,2
"With reference to Faizpur Session, consider the following statements:1.It proposed to adopt cooperative farming.2.It called to abolish feudal levies and forced labour.3.It was the first Congress session held in a village.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"The Congress in herFaizpur session had resolved to adopt an agrarian program. Major features are- 50% rent reduction in rent and revenue, exemption of uneconomic holdings from rent and land tax, taxation on agricultural income, abolition of feudal levies and forced labour, cooperative farming, wiping out arrears of rent, modification of ejectment laws and recognition of peasant unions etc.
It was silent on the issue of abolition of Zamindari andTaluqdari systems and was criticized bykisan leaders for the same.",Hint 99,1,3
"With reference to the General Elections in India 1945, consider the following statements:1.The Congress secured majority of the Muslim votes.2.The Muslim League captured all the reserved seats in the Central Assembly.3.The elections witnessed strong anti-British unity in contrast to communal voting.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 3 only,2 only,2 and 3 only,None,2,"Before the WWII ended on August 15, 1945, there was a general election in Britain. The election ended with the defeat of Conservative Party of Winston Churchill and now the new Government of Labour Party came into power with Clement Atlee as Prime
Minister. The new Secretary of State for India was SirPathick Lawrence.
The first major step by this new government was to announce a General Election in India. The last general elections were held in 1936 and now almost a decade later, the whole world had changed.
The results of the elections were announced in December 1945.
In these elections Congress secured over 91% of non-Muslim votes. Hence, Statement 1 is incorrect.
The Muslim league secured all the reserved Muslim seats in the Central Assembly. Hence, Statement 2 is correct.
Congress formed the Government with absolute majority in Madras, United provinces, Bihar, Orissa and Central Provinces. In Punjab it made a coalition Government withAkalis and Unionists. Muslim League was in majority in Sind and Bengal.
The elections witnessed communal voting in contrast to the strong anti-British unity shown in various upsurges due to: 1. Separate electorates; 2. Limited franchise. Hence, 3rd statement is incorrect.",Hint 100,1,1
"Regarding Karachi session 1931 of Congress, consider the following statements:1.The goal of Congress is defined as Purna Swaraj for the first time.2.A resolution on fundamental rights was accepted which included right to free and compulsory primary education as fundamental right.3.A resolution on national economic programme was passed which included peasants and workers right to form union.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",2 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"The goal of Congress is defined asPurna Swaraj for the first time in Lahore session 1929. So option 1 is incorrect. In Karachi session two very important resolutions were passed:
1.Resolution on fundamental rights which included primary education as a fundamental right. 2.So option 2 is correct.
3.Resolution on National economic programme was pass which included right to form unions (by peasants and workers) 4.So option 3 is correct.
The Karachi session remained the basic political and economic programme for congress for future.",Hint 101,1,2
"Consider the following statements regarding Nagpur Session of Congress, 1920:1.Khilafat Committe accepted the suggestion of non-cooperation and asked Gandhiji to lead the movement.2.Earlier emphasis on the use of constitutional means was substituted by peaceful methods for attainment of self-government.3.The resolution provided for setting up of Provincial Congress Committees on linguistic basis.Which of the statements given above is/are correct ?",1 only,2 and 3 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"Nagpur Session, December 1920:
1. The programme of non-cooperation was endorsed.
2. An important change was made in Congress creed; now, instead of having the attainment of self-government through constitutional means as its goal, the Congress decided to have the attainment of Swaraj throughpeaceful and legitimate means, thus committing itself to an extra-constitutional mass struggle.
3. Some important organizational changes were made: a Congress Working Committee (CWC) of 15 members was setup to lead the Congress from now onwards; Provincial Congress Committees on Linguistic basis were organized; ward committees were organised and entry fee was reduced to fourannas.
4. Gandhi declared that if the non-cooperation program was implemented completely, Swaraj would be ushered within a year.
Gandhiji was a special invitee to theKhilafat Conference in November 1919. He suggested toteKhilafat committee that it adopt a programme of non-violence to protest the Governments behaviour onKhilafat issue. On June, 1920 theKhilafat committee at Allahabad unanimously accepted the suggestion of non-cooperation and askedGandhiji to lead the movement. Thus statement 1 is wrong. Hence, B is the correct answer.",Hint 102,1,3
Why was the Indian Statutory Commission appointed before the stipulated declared period of ten years for introducing fresh proposals after the constitutional reforms of 1919 ?,To check the discontent among Indians due to Jalianwala Bhagh Massacre,Prospect of change in Government in Britain.,To pacify the constitutional demands of Indian National Congress,To check the growing influence of revolutionaries.,2,"Indian Nationalists had for many years declared the Constitutional reforms of 1919 as inadequate and had beenclamoring for an early reconsideration of the constitutional question, but the government had been adamant that the declared period of ten years but lapse before fresh proposals were considered.
In 1927, however, the Conservative government of Britain faced with the prospect of electoral defeat at the hands of theLabor Party, suddenly decided that it could not leave an issue which concerned the future of the Britishempire in the irresponsible hands of an inexperiencedLabor Government and it was thus that theindian Statutory Commission was appointed.",Hint 103,1,1
What was the main reason for the congress to accept the Dominion Status initially as suggested by the Mountbatten Plan?,Congress wanted India to be a part of the Commonwealth.,Congress wanted to assume the power immediately to tackle the explosive situation.,To keep intact the defence partnership and economic relations with the British.,Congress was not in a position to provide a strong leadership to the nation at this stage.,2,"The Mountbatten Plan sought an early transfer of power on the basis of Dominion Status to India and Pakistan. Congress was willing to accept the Dominion status for a while because it felt it must assume full power immediately and meet boldly the explosive situation in the country. Besides dominion status gave breathing time to the new administration as British officers and civil servants could stay on for a while and let Indians settle in easier into their new positions of authority.
For Britain, dominion status offered a chance of keeping India in the Commonwealth, even if temporarily.",Hint 104,1,2
Which of the following was/were part of the Cripps proposal?1.India to have dominion status after the war with the right to secede.2.Constituent assembly to be set up with members from both British India provinces as well as princely states.3.Any province not willing to join Indian Union could have a separate Constitution for itself.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"Cripps Mission was sent to India under the president ship of Stafford Cripps inmarch 1942. The intention was to get Indian support forBritishers in the ongoing World War II. It proposed:
An Indian Dominion that will be free to decide its relations with the commonwealth and United NationsA constituent assembly to beconvened to frame a newconstitution.
Any province not willing to join the Union could have a separate constitution and form aseparate .
Other points in the proposal were-Acceptance of Indian constitution by British government would be subject to condition that any province would have the right to have separate union and a treaty to be negotiated to effect the power transfer to safeguard racial and religious minoritiesDefense of India to remain in British hands.",Hint 105,1,3
Which of the following was/were established by Sir Syed Ahmed Ali Khan?1.Mohammedan Anglo-Oriental College2.United Indian Patriotic Association3.Mohammedan Anglo-Oriental Defence AssociationSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 onl,"1, 2 and 3",4,"Sir Syed in 1875 established the Mohammedan Anglo-Oriental College. Sir Syeds objectives in establishing the College were: (i) to popularise scientific and Western learning among the Muslims, and (ii) to promote loyalty towards the rulers and win their favour.
In 1888, Sir Syed set up United Indians Patriotic Association with the object of countering the Congress propaganda and policy in England and in India and to wean people away from the Congress
Then, in 1893 he set up exclusively sectarian Mohammedan Anglo-Oriental Defence Association to keep Muslims aloof from political agitation and to strengthen British rule in India.",Hint 106,1,1
"Which of the following was not a part of the Attlees Declaration of Feb 20, 1947?",Appointment of Lord Mountbatten as the new Viceroy was announced.,The British would transfer all the powers to the Constituent Assembly.,A deadline was set to make India independent.,British power over the Princely States would lapse after the transfer of power.,2,"The Prime Minister of Britain Clement Atlee declared on February 20, 1947 in the House of Commons that the British would quit India after transferring power into the responsible hand not later than June 30, 1948. The idea was that the Indians should settle their issues before that. He also announced the appointment of LordMountabatten as Viceroy in place of Lord Wavell.
He also announced that the British would relinquish power either to some form of Central Government or in some areas to the existing provincial governments if the Constituent Assembly was not fully representativei.e if the Muslim majority provinces did not join. Moreover, it was also announced that the British power and obligations vis-à-vis Princely States would lapse with the transfer of power, but these would not be transferred to any successor government in British India.",Hint 107,1,2
Which of the following is not correct in the context of the Royal Indian Navy (RIN) Revolt?,"It started as a protest against the hardships regarding pay, food and racial discrimination.","Congress, Muslim League and Communist flags were jointly hoisted on the ships masts.",Sardar Patel and Mohd. Ali Jinnah played an active role in making the mutineers surrender.,Cabinet Mission was sent in response to this revolt.,4,"The RIN Revolt started on 18th Feb, 1946 when 1100 naval ratings of HMISTalwar struck work at Bombay to protest against the treatment meted out to them- flagrant racial discrimination, unpalatable food, and abuses to boot.
The mutineers hoisted three flags tied together on the ships which they had captured -One of Congress, One of Muslim League, and the third Red Flag of the Communist Party of India.
The mutiny was ended by intervention ofSardar Patel, who after a meeting with M. S. Khan made a statement of ending the strike. The similar statement was made by Jinnah in Calcutta. The mutineers surrendered but despite the assurances of Congress and Muslim League, many mutineers were arrested, subjected to court martial and dismissed from the services. The violence broke out in Mumbai and over 200 people lost lives in this disturbance. The mutiny made an impression on the British, that it would be better to leave the country.
On February 19, the second day of this mutiny, Cabinet Mission was sent to India. However, it was not in response to this revolt. The decision to send out the Mission was taken by the British Cabinet on 22 January 1946 and even its announcement on 19 February had been slated a week earlier the revolt began.",Hint 108,1,3
Which of the following can be regarded as the aims/reasons for launching Individual Satyagraha ?,To give another opportunity to the Government to accept Congress demands peacefully.,To show that nationalist patience was not due to weakness.,To give few selected individual Congressmen to pursue their own provincial demands.,Both (a) and (b) are correct.,4,"The aims of launching Individual Satyagraha were- (i) to express peoples feeling that they were not interested in the war and they had made no distinction between Nazism and the double autocracy that ruled India; ii) to show the nationalist patience was not due to weakness; iii) to give another opportunity to the Government to Congress demands peacefully.
Gandhi decided to initiate a limited Satyagraha on an individual basis by a few selected individuals in every locality. The demand of the Satyagrahi would be the freedom of speech against the war through an anti-war declaration. (2nd World War). Hence option (c) is incorrect.",Hint 109,1,1
"With regard to the ideology of the Congress Left Wing with the rise of Congress Socialist Party , consider the following statements:1.They stood for complete independence and wanted Swaraj not for the classes but for the masses.2.They stood for anti-Imperialism, nationalism and socialism.3.Their ideological inspiration came from Russian nihilists and Irish nationalists.Which of the statements given above is/are not correct ?",1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,3 only,1 and 3 only,3,"The Congress Socialist Party was launched in 1934, to work within the Congress, to strengthen it, to mould and shape its policies. Their ideological inspiration came from Marxism and Democratic Socialism and they stood for anti-Imperialism, nationalism and Socialism, whereas, it was Revolutionary Terrorists who were inspired by the methods of Russian nihilists and Irish nationalists. Hence only 3rd statement is incorrect. They stood for complete independence and Socialism and they advocated Swaraj not for the classes but for the masses.",Hint 110,1,2
The Azad Hind Fauj had brigades named after icons. Which among the following are the brigades under it?1.Gandhi2.Nehru3.Azad4.Subhash5.Rani JhansiSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 4 and 5 only","2, 3 and 4 only","1, 2, 3 and 5 only","1, 2, 3, 4 and 5",4,"TheFauj had brigades named after Gandhi, Nehru, Azad andSubhash, and Rani Jhansi. Netaji was not interested in having a brigade named after him, but had to relent to the growing pressure of thejawans.",Hint 111,1,3
"Which of the following were the amendments proposed by Jinnah, on behalf of the Muslim League, at the All Parties Conference held at Calcutta in December 1928 to discuss the Nehru Report ?1.Separate Electorates2.Federal setup with residual powers to provinces3.One-third representation to Muslims in the Central Legislature4.Reservation to Muslims in Bengal and Punjab Legislature5.Separation of Sindh from BombaySelect the correct answer using the code given below.","1, 2 and 3 only","1, 4 and 5 only","2, 3 and 4 only","2, 3, 4 and 5 only",3,"Separate Electorates and Separation of Sindh from Bombay were part of Jinnahs fourteen demands. They were given when the three amendments proposed were not accommodated.
Federal setup with residual powers to provinces, one-third representation to Muslims in the Central Legislature, reservation to Muslims in Bengal and Punjab Legislature were the three amendments proposed by Jinnah",Hint 112,1,1
Consider the following statements regarding Justice Party of Madras Province which formed the government in 1920.1.It was founded by C Rajgopalachari.2.It supported Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms.3.It did not support Non-Cooperation Movement but supported Civil Disobedience Movement.4.It introduced women suffrage and abolished Devadasi system.Which of the statements given above is/are correct ?,1 only,2 and 4 only,3 and 4 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",2,"Justice Part was formally launched on November 20, 1916, in Chennai. Its three founders were Dr. T.M. Nair, P.TheagarayaChettiar and Dr. C.NatesaMudaliar. Justice Party formed the government in Madras Province in 1920. Madras was a site of Brahman-Non-Brahman conflict. It launched an active campaign against the Brahman Congress and its non-cooperation movement and rallied in support of the Montagu-
Chelmsford Reforms. Also, Justice Party declared their opposition to Civil Disobedience movement like HinduMahasabha and Muslim League.
It introduced women suffrage and abolished Devadasi system. It initiated several other egalitarian moves like issuing a government order for the public utility of water from ponds and wells. Till then certain sections, likeAdiDravidars, were denied access to public water sources. The Justice Party government formed an admission council to regulate admission to colleges, putting an end to seats being cornered only by upper caste candidates. In the field of medical education, the government also took full control of the Medical Department, which until then was under the control of the British; it did this by appointing Indians.",Hint 113,1,2
"In context of freedom struggle in 1940s, what does the term Prati Sarkar refers to?",It was a movement to show solidarity with the British Government.,It was the title given to a group of revolutionaries in the Bengal Province.,It was an Independent Government formed in Satara.,It was an initiative by British government to secure Indian support in the World War.,3,Prati Sarkar was one of the many independent Indian led local level governments which were formed in parallel to the nationwide Quit India movement in 1942.Prati Sarkar was a name given to the Government set up inSatara by leaders like NanaPatil and Y.BChavan.,Hint 114,1,3
"What did the Tripuri Session of Congress, 1939 declared in context of freedom struggle in princely States?",It called upon to establish the All India State people Conference,It declared the establishment of Congress units in different princely States,It cautioned congress leaders in taking up the demands of the people of Princely States,It removed all restraints which congress had imposed upon itself in taking up princely state demands.,4,The Congress in the Tripuri Session had passed a resolution declaring its new policy towards the princely states. It announced to remove the restraints which the Congress had imposed upon itself in the past while raising the voice of people of Princely States. The election ofJawahar Lal Nehru as the President of Ludhiana Session 1939 also gave a big boost to their cause.,Hint 115,1,1
Which of the following were the main goals of Wavells Breakdown Plan?1.A safe withdrawal of the British from India.2.To avoid a partition of India by attempting to maintain it as one geographic entity.3.To give the Muslim League an equal say in constitution formation.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"The Breakdown Plan was prepared by Lord Wavell and his closest circle of advisors to deal with the fast evolving political situation in India. Two main political tendencies had crystallized in post-War India: Keeping India as one geographic entity; the second one was diametrically opposed to it, espoused by the Muslims, who wanted an independent Muslim-majority state.
Wavells breakdown plan was formulated with two main goals in mind: Firstly, a safe withdrawal of the British from India; secondly, to avoid a partition of India by attempting to maintain it as one geographic entity.
For the first goal Wavell suggested a phased withdrawal from India, which would be initiated from the Hindu-majority provinces of the south.
The second goal was to be achieved by proposing a partition of both the Punjab and Bengal, as a bargaining tool with the Muslim League to deter from pursuing its agenda of a separate Muslim-majority homeland on religious grounds.
Although Wavells overall plan was rejected in London, parts of it were, however, incorporated in the final withdrawal plan laid down by Mountbatten, Wavells successor, in his June 3 Plan. This included the partitioning of both the Bengal and the Punjab thus dealing a blow to Muslim interests in both those provinces.",Hint 116,1,2
Bardoli Satyagraha was launched against,Unjustified hike in land revenue by the authorities.,Oppression of thikadars in charge of revenue collection.,Refusal to grant remission in land revenue by the authorities despite a drought.,The systems of summary evictions and renewal fees,1,"The movement sparked off in January 1926 when the authorities decided to increase the land revenue by 30%. TheBardoli Inquiry Committee constituted by the Congress found the revenue hike to be unjustified. Under Patel, theBardoli peasants resolved to refuse payments of the revised assessment until the Government appointed an independent tribunal or accepted the currentamount as full payment. The government eventually relented when a committee went into the whole affair and found the revenue hike to be unjustified and recommended a rise of 6% only.
Kheda Satyagraha was launched against the refusal to grant remission by the authorities despite a drought.
Oppression ofthikadars in charge of revenue collection was one of the issues inEka Movement. Summary evictions and renewal fees are issues in theKisan Sabha Movement.",Hint 117,1,3
Consider the following statements regarding Home rule league movement:1.Tilaks Home Rule league covered whole India while Besants League was restricted to southern parts of India.2.Home Rule movement was joined by both extremist leaders as well as moderates leaders.3.Home rule league movement promoted political education among youths.Which of statements given above is/are correct?,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"Tilaks Home Rule league was restricted toMaharastra only. While Besants League covered whole India includingMaharastra. So option 1 is incorrect. Home Rule movement was joined by both extremist leaders (Motilal Nehru, C.R. Das) as well as moderates leaders who were disillusioned by congress inactivity joined Home Rule league movement. So option 2 is correct. Through seminars, public meetings.
Libraries, newspaper, pamphlets Home rule league movement promoted political education among youths. So option 3 is also correct.",Hint 118,1,1
Consider the following statements about the Mappila (moplah) revolt:1.The Muslim tenants revolted against the Hindu landlords.2.They were opposed by the local congress body.3.It was violent in nature.4.It was merged with the khilafat agitation.Which of the above statements is/are correct?,2 and 4 only,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 3 and 4only","1, 2, 3 and 4",3,"Mappila Revolt-TheMappilas were the Muslim tenants inhabiting the Malabar region where most of the landlords were Hindus. TheMappilas had expressed their resentment against the oppression of the landlords during the nineteenth century also. Their grievances centredaround lack of security of tenure, high rents, renewal fees and other oppressive exactions.
TheMappila tenants were particularly encouraged by the demand of the local Congress body for a government legislation regulating tenant – landlord relations. Soon, theMappila movement merged with the ongoingKhilafat agitation. The leaders of theKhilafat – Non – Cooperation Movement like Gandhi,Shaukat Ali andMaulana Azad addressedMappila meetings. After the arrest of national leaders, the leadership passed into the hands of localMappila leaders. Things took a turn for the worse in August 1921 when the arrest of a respected priest leader, AliMusaliar, sparked off large – scale riots. Initially, the symbols of British authority courts, police stations, treasuries and offices – and unpopular landlords (jenmies who were mostly Hindus) were the targets. But once the British declared martial law and repression began in earnest, the character of the rebellion underwent a definite change.
Many Hindus were seen by theMappilas to be helping the authorities. What began as an anti – government and anti – landlord affair acquired communal overtones. Thecommunalization of the rebellion completed the isolation of theMappilas from theKhilafatNon – Cooperation Movement. By December 1921, all resistance had come to an end.",Hint 119,1,2
Which of the following statements is true about Maulana Abul kalam Azad?1.He was President of Congress for consecutively for five years from 1940 to 1945.2.He was the founding members of All India Khilafat Committee.3.He held the portfolio of Education Minister in the Government formed in 1947.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"Born in Mecca where his forefathers had settled during the 1857 Revolt,AbulKalam Azad came with his parents to India in 1898. Settled in Calcutta, he began participating in the freedom struggle by associating himself with the revolutionaries during the swadeshi uprising.
Through AlHilal and AlBalagh, weeklies which he began in 1912 and 1915 respectively, he started spreading nationalistic thoughts. He came in contact with Gandhi and began lending support to the non-cooperation agitation.
Muslims were especially upset about the future of the Islamic places of worship after the allied powers had partitioned the Turkish Empire. In IndiaMaulana Mohammad AliJauhar and his brotherMaulanaShaukat Ali along with some other Muslim leaders such as Dr. Mukhtar Ahmed Ansari.Raees-ul-Muhajireen Barrister Jan MuhammadJunejo,HasratMohani,MaulanaAbulKalam Azad and Dr. HakimAjmal Khan joined hands a created an All IndiaKhilafat Committee, at Lucknow. It had two main demands, which were never accepted: Caliph Sultan must retain sufficient territories so that he is able to defend the Islamic Faith. The places whichare calledJazirat-ul-arab, including the Arabia, Syria, Iraq and Palestine must remain under Muslim suzerainty.
He presided over the Congress special session at Delhi in 1923 and became the youngest President.
He was again elected President of the Congress at itsRamgarh session in 1940. He remained President as no session was held in the fivefollow¬ing years. AbdulKalam Azad headed theJamiatulUlema as President in 1924, and the Nationalist Muslim Conference five years later in the same capacity. Confined to the Ahmednagar fort after his arrest along with other leaders in 1942,Maulana Azad participated in theSimla Conference after his release. He also negotiated with the British Cabinet Mission in 1946 for Indias independence. He was made a member of the Constituent Assembly and became Minister of Education and Arts in the interim government.",Hint 120,1,3
"With reference to the Montague- Chelmsford report on Indian constitutional reforms, 1918, consider the following statements:1.The Indians were consulted by the Britishers before finalizing the report.2.The final report was rejected by the moderate leaders.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"In November, 1917, Lord Montague visited India and conferred with the Lord Chelmsford, the officials of the central and provincial governments and Indian leaders. On the basis of these deliberations the Report on Indian Constitutional Reforms-which came to be known as Montague-Chelmsford Report was published in July, 1918. It was on the basis of the report that the Government of India Act, 1919 was drafted and introduced in the British Parliament in December, 1919. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
In August 1918 a special session of the congress was called at Bombay to consider this report. In this session a resolution was passed by the Congress condemning the scheme as inadequate, unsatisfactory and disappointing. The Moderates abstained from attending the Congress session at Bombay, they were convinced that the proposals marked a substantial advance upon then existing conditions and that there should be sincere appreciation of the good faith shown therein. Hence, statement 2 is wrong.",Hint 121,1,1
Arrange the following events that took place in different phases leading to the growth of communalism in the history of modern India:1.Separate electorates for Muslims2.Direct action day3.Resolution of separate Muslim state in the Lahore session of Muslim league4.Jinnahs 14 pointsSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,4-1-3-2,4-1-2-3,1-4-3-2,1-4-2-3,3,"Separate electorate for Muslims was awarded in 1909 under the Morley-Minto reform or GOI act 1909Muslim League called for direct action from August 16 in 1946 to achieve Pakistan inresponse to Nehrus statement that they are not bound by any single thing but the constituent assembly implying sovereignty of the assembly.
Resolution for separate Muslim state was passed by Muslim League in Lahore session in 1940Jinnah gave his fourteen points in response to the non-inclusion of amendment proposed by him at the All Parties Conference in December 1928. These 14 points were to become basis of all future propaganda of the Muslim League.",Hint 122,1,2
Which of the following methods was/were used for mass mobilization by extremist leaders in early 20th century?1.Organization of Samitis.2.Religious revivalism.3.Organization of labor strikes.4.Social boycott.Select the correct answer using code given below.,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 3 and 4 only",2 and 4 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",4,"The political programme of theextremists required mass mobilisation and religion was looked at any leaders likeAurobindo Ghosh as a means to reach the masses. Religious revivalism therefore was a main feature of this new politics.Bhagavadgita became a source of spiritual inspiration for the swadeshi volunteers and Hindu religious symbols were frequently used to mobilise the masses.
The other method of mass mobilisation was to organisesamitis. They were engaged in various forms of mobilising efforts, such as moral and physical training, philanthropic work,propogation of swadeshi message, organisation of the swadeshi craft, education etc.
Labour strikes were organised, primarily in foreign owned countries for mass mobilisation.
Extremists leaders also used social coercion or social boycott-exerted through caste associations, professional and nationalist organisations-to punishcollaboratos or to produce consent among the reluctant participants.",Hint 123,1,3
Which of the following leaders participated in Individual Satyagraha ?1.Vinoba Bhave2.C.Rajagopalachari3.Jawaharlal Nehru4.Sarojini NaiduSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 3 and 4 only",2 and 4 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",2,"Individual Satyagraha was direct result of August Offer. August offer was brought during critical period of war by British in 1940. Both Congress and Muslim League rejected August Offer. Congress wished to launch Civil disobedience Movement, but Gandhi saw the atmosphere against such a movement, he didnt want hamper the War efforts. He called for individual Satyagraha. The first Satyagrahi selected was AcharyaVinobaBhave, who was sent to Jail when he spoke against the war. Second Satyagrahi wasJawahar Lal Nehru. Third was BrahmaDatt, one of the inmates of the GandhisAshram.Sarojini Naidu was also a part of individual",Hint 124,1,1
"With reference to Ghadar newspaper, consider the following statements:1.The newspaper was initially released in Urdu.2.The newspaper was circulated among Indian immigrants in North America ,Philippines and China.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2 ,3,"The paperGhadar was launched on the first of November, 1913, the first issue was in Urdu followed a month later by the Gurmukhi version. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
TheGhadar was circulated widely among Indian immigrants in North America as well as immigrants in the Philippines, Hong Kong, China,Malay states, Singapore, Trinidad and the Honduras. Hence, statement 2 is correct.",Hint 125,1,2
"With reference to temple entry movement in Kerala, consider the following statements:1.Gandhiji took a tour in Kerala in support of this movement.2.Many higher caste Hindus organization supported temple entry movement in Kerala.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"Statement 1 iscorrect : In early March 1925,Gandhiji began his tour of Kerala and supported the movement.
Statement 2 iscorrect : Many savarna (or Higher casteHindus) organization like Nair Service Society, NairSamajam and Kerala Hindu Sabha, supported temple entry movement",Hint 126,1,3
The Rowlatt Act passed in March 1919 aimed to:,Put restrictions on publications by vernacular press in India.,Allow Indian judges to try British offenders in criminal cases at the District level.,Enable the govenrnment to imprison any person without a trial or conviction in the court of law.,Curtail the freedom of individuals to become a part of political associations.,3,"In March 1919, the government passed theRowlatt Act even though every single Indian member of the Central Legislative Council opposed it. This Act authorised the Government to imprison any person without trial and conviction in a court of law. The Act would thus also enable the government to suspend the right of Habeas corpus which had been the foundation of civil liberties in Britain.",Hint 127,1,1
The main reason for the launch of Khilafat movement was to:,Demand for greater political representation of Muslims in the legislature and executive.,Agitate against the discrimination being meted out to the Indian Muslims.,Protest against the treatment meted out to the Ottoman Empire by British.,Show dissent against governments decision to go back on partition of Bengal. ,3,Indian Muslims were critical of the treatment meted out to Turkey (Ottoman Empire) under Treaty of Sevres.Khilafat movement was launched to influence British in its treatment of the Ottoman Empire post World War 1.,Hint 128,1,2
The movement to boycott the Simon Commission was organised because:,British didnt accept the demand of Poorn Swaraj by Congress.,To protest against the Rowlatt act.,There were no Indians in the Simon commission.,The chairman of Simon Commission was unpopular for his anti-India views.,3,"What angered Indians the most was the exclusion of Indians from the Simon Commission and the basic notion behind this exclusion that foreigners would discuss and decide upon Indias fitness for self-government. So, option c is correct. The demand of Poorn Swaraj was made in Lahore Session of Congress. This session was held in 1929 and Simon Commission was appointed in 1927.Rowlatt act was in 1919.",Hint 129,1,3
Which of the following best describes the strategy of national movement of Gandhian era?,Struggle-truce-struggle,Struggle till the freedom,Struggle within the constitutional sphere,Struggle without harming the British rule,1,"A major aspect of nationalist strategy was the long-drawn out character of the hegemonic struggle. Under this strategy, which may be described as Struggle-Truce-Struggle or S-T-S, a phase of vigorous extra-legal mass movement and open confrontation with colonial authority was followed by a phase during which direct confrontation was withdrawn, and political concessions, if any, wrested from the colonial regime were worked and shown to be inadequate. During this latter, more passive, phase, intense political and ideological work was carried on among the masses within the existing legal and constitutional framework, and forces were gathered for another mass movement at a higher level. The culmination of this strategy of S-T-S came with a call for Quit India and the achievement of independence",Hint 130,1,1
Which of the following factors is/are responsible for the spread of Nationalism in India in 19th century?1.Rise of western thought and education2.Growth of nationalist newspapers3.Improved transport and communication linksSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 3 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Statement 1 is correct. Spread of modern western education and thoughts during 19th century imbibed a modern, rational, secular, democratic and nationalist political outlook, which played a key role in growing nationalism.
2.Statement 2 is correct. The chief instrument through which the nationalist-minded Indians spread the message of patriotism and modern economic, social and political ideas, and created an all-India consciousness was the Press. Large numbers of nationalist newspapers made their appearance during the second half of the 19th century.
3.Statement 3 is correct. Further railway and other communication system also played a critical role in spread of Nationalism in India.",Hint 131,1,2
Which of the following were the popular means of mobilisation during Civil Disobedience Movement:1.Prabhatpheris2.Patrikas3.Magic lanterns4.Tying RakhiSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 4 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 2, 3 and 4",3,"One of the biggest reason behind success of CDM was use of traditional means by nationalist leaders to connect masses.
1.InPrabhatpheris, bands of men, women and children went around at dawn singing nationalist songs, became the rule in villages and towns.Patrikas, or illegal news-sheets, sometimes written by hand and sometimes cyclostyled, were part of the strategy to defy the hated Press Act, and they flooded the country.
2.Magic lanterns were used to take the nationalist message to the villages. Public meeting also helped in to connect to the masses.
3.TyingRakhi was a means of cementing ties during partition of Bengal and part of swadeshi movement. Hence option (c) is the correct answer.",Hint 132,1,3
Consider the following statements with regard to Dharsana Satyagraha:1.It aimed to oppose the salt tax.2.It was lead by Sarojini Naidu.3.It was launched during the civil disobedience movement.Which of the statement given above is/are correct?,2 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Statement 1 is correct.Dharasana Satyagraha was a protest against the British salt tax in colonial India in May, 1930.
1.Statement 2 is correct-Sarojini Naidu, ImamSaheb,Gandhijis comrade of the South African struggle, andGandhijis sonManilaal participated inDharasana salt Satyagraha.
3.Statement 3 is correct. It was launched during civil disobediencemovement .",Hint 133,1,1
Which of the following events in India took place immediately after the World War II?1.Telangana Rebellion2.Warlis Revolt3.Tebhaga Movement4.Punnapra-VayalarSelect the correct answer using code given below.,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,2 and 4 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",4,"1.Telengana Rebellion was in 1946.Warlis Revolt was a peasant revolt in Thane, Maharashtra,1945-47.
2.Tebhaga Movement was in 1946.Punnapra-Vayalar, is a communist uprising in the princely State of Travancore, 1946.
3.Hence all the given events took place after World War II.",Hint 134,1,2
Consider the following statements with reference to Indian National Army (INA)?1.The idea for the creation of INA was first conceived by Subhash Chandra Bose.2.The head quarter of INA was at Tokyo.3.Rani Jhansi regiment was an all women regiment under INA.Which of the statement given above is/are correct?,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,3 only,1 and 2 only,3,"1.Statement 1:- incorrect, it was conceived by Mohan Singh an ex-army officer of British army who decided not to support the British after their reversal in South East Asia.
2.Statement 2:-Incorrect, in the second phase of INA, when Bose was brought to Singapore by means of German and Japanese submarines, he setup provisionalgovt for free Indian in 1943 which was recognised by axis powers. He setup headquarters at Rangoon and Singapore and started reorganizing INA.
3.Statement 3:- Correct. Rani Jhansi Regiment waswas anall-women regiment under INA.",Hint 135,1,3
"With reference to Civil Disobedience Movement, consider the following pairs:LeaderPlace1.C. Rajagoplachari:Tamilnadu2.K. Kelappan:Malabar3.Khan Abdul Gaafar Khan:LahoreWhich of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?",1 and 3 only,2 only,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.C. Rajagopalachari, led a salt march in Tamilnadu from Trichinopoly toVedaranniyam on theTanjore coast.
2.K.Kelappan, the hero of theVaikom Satyagraha, walked from Calicut toPayannur to break the salt law in Malabar, modern dayKerla.
3.Frontier Gandhi was active in North West frontier and not in Lahore. Khan AbdulGaafar Khanlead a band of non-violent revolutionaries, theKhudaiKhidmatgars, popularly known as the Red Shirts that played an extremely active role in the Civil Disobedience Movement in Peshawar area.",Hint 136,1,1
Which of the following were the reasons that led to decline of Swadeshi movement?1.Arrest and deportation of major leaders2.Split in Indian National Congress3.Repression by the government4.Annulment of partition of BengalSelect the correct answer using code given below.,2 and 3 only,1 and 4 only,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 2, 3 and 4",3,"1.Statement 1 is correct: Between 1907 and 1908, nine major leaders in Bengal including Ashwini KumarDutt and Krishna KumarMitra were deported.Tilak was given a sentence of six years imprisonment;Ajit Singh andLajpat Rai of Punjab were deported and Chidambaram Pillai andHarisarvottam Rao from Madras and Andhra were arrested.
2.Statement 2 is correct: The internal squabbles, and especially, the split, in 1907 in the Congress, the apex all-India organization, weakened the movement.
3.Statement 3 is correct: The government, seeing the revolutionary potential of the movement, came down with a heavy hand. Repression took the form of controls and bans on public meetings, processions and the press. Student participants were expelled from Government schools and colleges, debarred from Government service, fined and at times beaten up by the police.
4.Statement 4 is incorrect: Annulment of Partition of Bengal was done in 1911 in Delhi Durbar after waning away of swadeshi movement.",Hint 137,1,2
First Round Table Conference was organized to:,Appease Muslim League and other communal organisations.,Discuss the Simon Commissions report.,To approve Gandhi Irwin pact.,Debate on atrocities during Civil Disobedience movement.,2,The British Government summoned in London in 1930 the first Round Table Conference of Indian leaders and spokesmen of the British Government to discuss the Simon Commission Report. Communal Award was provided after the failure of 3 Round Table Conferences. It might have appeased Muslim League but it was not the stated objective of Round Table Conferences.,Hint 138,1,3
"Consider the following statements in context of Communal Award announced in 1932:1.Separate electorates were introduced for Sikhs, Christians and depressed classes for the first time.2.The award was rejected by the Congress.3.Gandhiji undertook fast unto death to make Dalit community realize the perils associated with the proposal.Select the correct answer from the code given below.",1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Statement 1 is incorrect. The separate electorates for Sikhs and Christians were introduced in 1919 itself. Separate electorate was introduced for the first time for depressed classes orharijans.
2.Statement 2 is incorrect as Congress neither rejected nor accepted the proposal. The dilemma was on account of acceptance granted in Lucknow Session of 1916 towards separate electorates for Muslims.
3.Statement 3 is correct asGandhiji undertook fast unto death for putting an end to this proposal. He believed that proposals would keepharijan community secluded and backward for lifelong.",Hint 139,1,1
"Consider the following statements:1.Under the guidance of M.A. Jinnah, Muslim League carried out Muslim Mass Contact Programme.2.Sarojini Naidu called M.A. Jinnah the Ambassador of Hindu-Muslim Unity.3.M.A. Jinnah was one of the founding members of Muslim League.Which of the statement given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.Statement 1 is incorrect. It was under Nehru that INC carried out Muslim Mass Contact Programme.
2.Statement 2 is correct. Jinnahs effort for national unity earned his this title.
3.Statement 3 is incorrect. Jinnah joined Muslim League much later.Infact he condemned the formation of ML initially.",Hint 140,1,2
Which of the following statements is/are correct with regard to Lahore Session of congress in 1929?1.Poorna Swaraj (Complete Independence) was declared as Congress objective.2.The Congress announced the launching of a civil disobedience movement.3.26 January 1930 was fixed as first Republic Day.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,2 and 3 only,1 and 2 only,1 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.Statement 1 is correct. The Lahore session of Congress in 1930 passed a resolution declaringPoorna Swaraj as its objective.
2.Statement 2 is correct. Congress also announced the launching of Civil Disobedience at the Lahore session.
3.Statement 3 is incorrect. In Lahore Session, 26 January 1930 was fixed as the first Independence Day not Republic Day.",Hint 141,1,3
Satyagraha Sabha was formed by Gandhiji during the national movement to conduct campaign against:,The Tinkathia system,The Rowlatt act,The Jallianwala Bagh massacre,The INA trials,2,"Just when the nationalists were expecting post-War constitutional concessions, the Government came out with the repressiveRowlatt Act which the nationalists took as an insult. Gandhi called for a nationwide protest in February 1919. But soon, having seen the constitutional protest fail, Gandhi organised a Satyagraha Sabha tolauch asatyagraha.",Hint 142,1,1
Consider the following statements with regard to Gandhian ideology:1.It was completely against industrialisation and was follower of self-reliant rural economy.2.It was against investment of foreign capital for development of India.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"1.Statement 1 is incorrect. Gandhiji was not opposed to modern large scale industry so long as it augmented, and lightened the burden of human labour and not displaces it. He also wanted large scale industry to be owned and controlled by the state and not by private capitalists.
2.Statement 2 is correct. British economists and administrators echoed for investment of British capital as major instrument for development of India. Indian nationalists includingDadabhaiNaoroji,Tilak, Gandhi and Nehru completely rejected the proposal. As per them, Foreign capital underdeveloped the nation than to develop it. It suppressed indigenous capital and made growth difficult. Also, it was politically harmful as it had its impact over the administration.",Hint 143,1,2
"With reference to Muslim league during the Indian national movement, consider the following statements:1.It did not join the Interim government of 1946.2.League supported the idea of compulsory grouping in Cabinet mission plan.3.Leagues Demand for Autonomous Muslim majority province was accepted by Cripps mission.Select the correct answer using the code given below.",1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,None,2,"1.Statement 1- Incorrect. Though interim government was initially formed by the Congress, Muslim league joined it later.Liyakat Ali khan a Muslim league leader was finance minister in interim government during 1946. He was instrumental in hamstringing interimgovernments decision.
2.Statement 2- correct. Muslim league was in favour of the idea of compulsory groping and pitched aggressively for it.
3.Statement 3 - Correct as the concept ofautonomusmuslimprovience was accepted bycripss mission 1942.",Hint 144,1,3
Consider the following pairs with respect to leaders of Swadeshi Movement in different regions:LeaderRegion1.Syed Haider Raza:Delhi2.Ajit Singh:Bihar3.Chidambaram Pillai:Madras4.Lala Lajpat Rai:PunjabWhich of the above pairs is/are correctly matched?,"1, 3 and 4 only",1 and 4 only,2 and 4 only,"1, 2 and 3 only",1,"LokamanyaTilak took the Swadeshi movement to different parts of India, especially Poona and Bombay; SyedHaidar Raza led the movement in Delhi; Rawalpindi,Kangra, Jammu, Multan andHaridwar witnessed active participation in the Swadeshi Movement;Ajit Singh andLalaLajpat Rai spread the Swadeshi message in Punjab and other parts of northern India. Chidambaram Pillai took the movement to the Madras presidency",Hint 145,1,1
Consider the following statements:1.Indian Civil Liberties Union was formed to mobilize public opinion against the encroachments on civil liberties.2.National Planning Committee was set up to draw up a development plan for free India under the chairmanship of Subhas Chandra Bose.Which of the statements given above is/are not correct?,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"1.Statement 1 is correct. Indian Civil Liberties Union was formed in August 1936 after the efforts of Nehru. It was formed on non-party, non- sectarian lines to mobilize public opinion against all the encroachments on civil liberties.
2.Statement 2 is incorrect. National Planning Committee was set up in 1938 bySubhash Chandra Bose to draw up a development plan for free India under the chairmanship of Nehru.",Hint 146,1,2
Consider the following statements with reference to Cabinet Mission Plan:1.It was sent to negotiate the terms for the transfer of power to Indians.2.It proposed a federal structure for India.3.Both Congress and Muslim League accepted the plan and agreed on interim government.Which of the above statement is/are correct?,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,2 only,1 and 3 only,1,"1.Statement 1 is correct. The Cabinet Mission was sent to India in 1946 to negotiate with Indian leaders the terms of transfer of power to Indians.
2.Statement 2 is correct. It proposed a two tier federal plan which was expected to maintain national unity while conceding the largest measure of regional autonomy.
3.Statement 3 is incorrect. Though the congress andmuslim league had differences in interpretations of the plan, both accepted the plan. However they could not agree on the plan for an interim government.",Hint 147,1,3
"With reference to Civil Disobedience Movement consider the following pairs:CampaignPlace1.Anti-Chaukidara:Eastern India2.Defiance of forest law:Maharashtra3.No revenue, No Tax:United ProvincesWhich of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?",1 and 2 only,3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.All the 3 pairs are correctly matched. In Bengal and Bihar, anti-chowkidara campaign was launched during civil disobedience movement.
2.Defiance of forest laws assumed a mass character in Maharashtra, Karnataka and the Central Provinces, especially in areas with large tribal populations who had been the most seriously affected by the colonial Governments restrictions on the use of the forest.
3.No revenue no tax campaign was the feature of UP. The no-revenue part was a call to thezamindars to refuse to pay revenue to the Government; the no rent was a call to the tenants not to pay rent to thezamindars.
4.Hence option (d) is the correct answer.",Hint 148,1,1
Which among the following was/were the actions undertaken by the congress ministries in the brief period of 28 months rule in provinces during 1937-39?1.Restrictions on press was removed.2.Land reforms and abolition of Zamindari system.3.Release of political prisoners including revolutionaries.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.Statement 1 is correct. All restrictions on the press were removed. Securities taken from newspapers and presses were refunded. The blacklisting of newspapers for purposes of government advertising was given up.
2.Statement 2 is incorrect. The Congress could not attempt an overhaul of agrarian structure by completely eliminating Zamindari system. The provincial ministers did not have enough powers to do so.
3.Statement 3 is correct. One of the first acts of the Congress Government was to release thousands of political prisoners including revolutionaries were released.",Hint 149,1,2
With reference to the Tebhaga struggle consider the following statements:1.It was started in Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu.2.It was a struggle between the share-croppers and the jotedars for payment of share of crop.3.The Floud Commission had made recommendations in the favour of the share-croppers.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 and 3 only,1 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3 only",3,"1.Statement 1 is not correct: Thetebhaga struggle was started in Bengal that held the limelight, in late 1946.
2.Statement 2 is correct: The share-croppers of Bengal began to assert that they would no longer pay a half share of their crop to the jotedars but only one-third and that before division the crop would be stored in theirkhamars (godowns) and not that of the jotedars.
3.Statement 3 is correct: They were encouraged by the fact that the Bengal Land Revenue Commission, popularly known as theFloud Commission, had already made this recommendation in its report to the government.",Hint 150,1,3
Which of the following statements is correct in the context of Swadeshi movement?,Swadeshi movement had its genesis in anti-partition protest in Bengal and thus remained restricted to Bengal only.,Disagreements among INC leadership over course of movement led to Surat split in 1907.,It found wide participation of students and urban middle class but lacked participation of women and workers.,Lord Rippon was viceroy when partition of Bengal was announced.,2,"1.Statement 1 not correct.Inspite of the movement having its genesis inanti partition protest in Bengal, the boycott movement spread to many parts of India.
2.Statement 2 is correct. As question of spreading the movement on pan India level and question of passive resistance divided INC which led to split in 1907.
3.Statement 3-The social base of the national movements now extended to include a certain zamindari section, the lower middle class in the cities and small towns and school and college students on a massive scale. Women came out of their homes for the first time and joined processions and picketing.
4.Statement 4- Lord Curzon was viceroy when partition of Bengal was announced.",Hint 151,1,1
The Quit India Movement was started after the failure of:,Cabinet Mission,Wavell Plan,Cripps Mission,Simon Commission ,3,"Quit India Movement was started in Aug 1942 after the breakdown of negotiations between Cripps Mission (March 1942) and the Congress. Cabinet Mission - 1946, Wavell Plan - 1945 and Simon Commission - 1928.",Hint 152,1,2
Which of the following reflects the influence of socialist ideas on Congress?1.Resolution on Fundamental Rights passed by Karachi Session.2.Formation of National Planning Committee in 1938.3.Election manifesto of the Congress in 1936.Select the correct answer using the codes given below.,2 only,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"The impact of the Left on the national movement was reflected in the resolution on Fundamental Rights and Economic Policy passed by the Karachi session of the Congress in 1931, the resolutions on economic policy passed at theFaizpur session in 1936, the Election Manifesto of the Congress in 1936, the setting up of a National Planning Committee in 1938, and the increasing shift ofGandhiji towards radical positions on economic and class issues.",Hint 153,1,3
Which of the following activities were undertaken during the Quit India movement?1.Disruption of communication channels.2.Attacks on government officials and police informers.3.Use of underground radio to disseminate news.4.Formation of parallel governments in different parts of the country.Which of the statements given above are correct?,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,"2, 3 and 4 only","1, 2, 3 and 4",4,"1.Statement 1 is correct. The activities during the Quit India movement included that of organizing the disruption of communications by blowing up bridges, cutting telegraph and telephone wires and derailing trains.
2.Statement 2 is correct: There were also a few attacks on government and police officials and police informers.
3.Statement 3 is correct. For dissemination of news they came up with underground Radio. Congress radio operated from different locations in Bombay. Ram ManoharLohia, regularly broadcasted on his radio.
4.Statement 4 is correct. Parallel governments were propped up in various locations - Ballia underChittuPande, inTamluk , insatara etc. They mostly helped in releasing arrested local leaders, set up arbitration courts, conducted Gandhian marriages etc.",Hint 154,1,1
Which of the following is correct regarding Cunningham Circular?,It permitted people living at the sea coast to collect duty free salt.,It prohibited the press to publish any criticism of British government.,It prohibited the students from participating in political activities associated with the freedom movement.,It raised the land revenue by 50% in Bengal.,3,The Cunningham circular of the Assam Government in 1930 prohibited the students from participating in political activities associated with the freedom movement. The students and their guardians were to furnish assurances of good behaviour. A powerful agitation led by students was launched against the infamous Cunningham circular.,Hint 155,1,2
Consider the following statements with reference to the INA upsurges:1.Sardar Patel advised the rebel members to continue the agitation till independence.2.Gandhiji lauded the efforts undertaken by ratings and fully supported their mutiny.3.Muhammad Ali Jinnah wanted Muslim INA members to surrender before the authority instead of striking.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3 only,4,"1.Statement 1 is incorrect,Sardar Patel advised rebellion to surrender and after the 3rd upsurge they heeded to his discretion.
2.Statement 2 is also incorrect, Gandhi wrote in his periodicalHarijanthat,if they mutinied for freedom of India they were doubly wrong, further he brought inTilaks concept of Swaraj and reiterated that,swarjcant be obtained by what is going on now in Bombay, Calcutta and Karachi.
3.Statement 3 is correct,muslim ratings went to the league to seek advices on the future action, Jinnah advised them tosurreneder themselves to the authority.",Hint 156,1,3
Which among the following statements is not correct regarding Swadesh Bandhab Samiti?,It was a popular corps of volunteers based in Barisal.,It was set up by Surendranath Banerjee.,It led to large number of Muslim peasantry joining Swadeshi movement. ,It settled many disputes through its Arbitration committee.,2,"1.Option (a) is correct: Corps of volunteers (orsamitis as they were called) were a major form of mass mobilization widely used by the Swadeshi Movement.
2.Option (b) is incorrect: The SwadeshBandhabSamiti set up by Ashwini KumarDutt, a school teacher, in Barisal was the mostwell known volunteer organization of them all.
3.Option (c) is correct: Through the activities of thisSamiti, whose 159 branches reached out to the remotest corners of the district,Dutt was able to generate an unparalleled mass following among the predominantly Muslim peasantry of the region.
4.Option (d) is correct: BarisalSamiti reportedly settled 523 disputes through eighty-nine arbitration committees.",Hint 157,1,1
The Non-cooperation movements programme included which of the following?1.Boycott of legislative councils2.Boycott of official titles and honours.3.Boycott of foreign clothSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"Non-cooperation programme was first launched by theKhilafat committee and later supported by Congress at its special session in Calcutta. It professed a boycott of legislative councils, schools, colleges, law courts, official titles,hounours and foreign cloth, till the Punjab andKhilafat wrongs were undone and till Swaraj was attained.",Hint 158,1,2
"The Swadeshi movement failed to attract Muslim peasantry on a wider scale because of?1.divide and rule policy of British which divided Bengal on communal lines.2.the use of traditional popular customs, festivals and institutions for mobilizing the masses.3.promise of abolition of zamindari system by British in East Bengal.Select the correct answer using the code given below.",3 only,1 only,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Statement 1 is correct - The British policy of consciously attempting to use communalism to turn the Muslims against the Swadeshi Movement was to a large extent responsible for this. This was the period when the All India Muslim League was set up with the active guidance and support of the Government. More specifically, in Bengal, people likeNawabSalimullah of Dacca were propped up as centres of opposition to the Swadeshi Movement. Mullahs andmaulvis were pressed into service and, unsurprisingly, at the height of the Swadeshi Movement communal riots broke out in Bengal.
2.Statement 2 is correct: The use of traditional popular customs, festivals and institutions for mobilizing the masses-a technique used widely to generate mass movements, especially in the initial stages-was misinterpreted and distorted by communalists backed by the state.
3.Statement 3 is not correct because British never assured any land reforms andinfact Muslim league which supported the partition was predominantly led by richzamindars and rulers which were against any sort of reform in land ownership.",Hint 159,1,3
With reference to Cabinet mission plan which of the following statements is/are correct?1.It rejected the demand of Pakistan.2.It recommended independence to Princely states.3.The elections to form interim government was conducted based on Cabinet mission plan.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Statement 1 is correct- as British policy in 1946 clearly indicated for a united India, The British preferred a united Indian subcontinent that could be a strong ally in commonwealth nation. Cabinet Mission was of the opinion that Pakistan was not viable and that the minorities autonomy must somehow be safeguarded within the framework of a united India.
2.Statement 2 is incorrect as the provinces and princes were not given the option to be independent that may lead to Balkanisation of India. They were given freedom to enter either with the successor government or with British government but not an independent unit.
3.Statement 3 is correct. Based on the recommendations of Cabinet Mission Plan, elections were held to form Constituent Assembly for drafting a new Constitution.",Hint 160,1,1
"The aim of Public Safety Bill, 1928 was to:","Regulate the manufacture, sale, possession, and carrying of firearms.",Allow British subjects to be tried by Indian judges.,Deport the foreigners suspected of propagating socialist and communist ideas.,Abolish oppressive social practices among various religious groups,3,"Frightened by the spread of socialist and communist ideas and influence and believing that the crucial role in this respect was being played by British and other foreign agitators sent to India by the Communist International, the Government proposed to acquire the power to deport undesirable and subversive foreigners by introducing Public Safety Bill, 1928. Hence option (c) is the correct answer.",Hint 161,1,2
"With reference to Delhi Proposals, 1927consider the following statements:1.It was a set of demands made by Muslim leaders in response to Simon Commission Report.2.It demanded that there should be proportional representation according to population in Punjab and Bengal.3.Nehru report included all the demands raised in the Delhi proposals.Which of the statement given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"1.Statement 1 is correct. As an answer to the challenge of the Simon Commission, Indian political leaders organized several all-India conferences to settle communal issues and draw up an agreed constitution for India. A large number of Muslim communal leaders met at Delhi in December 1927 and evolved four basic demands known as the Delhi Proposals.
2.Statement 2 is correct. Delhi proposal had 4 demands 1)Sindh to be made a separate electorate,
2)NWFP should be treated constitutionally on the same footing as other provinces. 3)Muslims should be have 33.3 % reservation in the central legislature.
4)Proportional representation in Punjab and Bengal.
3.Statement 3 is not correct. Nehru accepted the first two demands of Delhi Proposals related to Sindh and NWFP. However it did not accept the other two demands.",Hint 162,1,3
Which of the following statements is/are correct regarding the outcome of Gandhi-Irwin Pact?1.The Government conceded the right to make salt for personal consumption.2.Congress suspended Civil Disobedience Movement.3.Congress agreed to participate in 3rd round table conference.Select the correct answers using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,2 only,1,"1.Statement 1 is correct. The Government conceded the right to make salt for personal consumption, not commercial sale.
2.Statement 2 is correct. The Congress suspended the Civil Disobedience Movement and agreed to take part in the 2nd round table conference. The third round table conference was held much later during the 2nd phase of Civil disobedience movement. Hence statement 3 is incorrect.",Hint 163,1,1
The main difference of opinion between the Swarajists and the no changers during the national movement was over:,Support for revolutionary movements,Entry into Legislative Councils.,Starting of civil disobedience including non payment of taxes.,Discontinuation of Non Cooperation movement.,2,"TheSwarajists like C.R. Das andMotilal Nehru wanted to end the boycott to legislative councils and to use them as platforms for nationalist movement after the suspension of the Non Cooperation movement. Whereas the No Changers likeSardarVallabhai Patel, Dr. Ansari and others opposed Council entry as they felt it would lead to neglect of Constructive work among the masses.",Hint 164,1,2
The main intention behind the Cripps Mission was to:,Decide on partition of India.,Study the feasibility of continuation of British Rule over India.,Review the working of Government of India Act 1935 and to propose changes if any.,Secure Indias cooperation in the war efforts.,4,"1.Statement D is correct - by 1942 Japan had occupied Rangoon. Britain now desperately wanted Indias cooperation in the war efforts and hence in Mar 1942, a mission headed by Sir Stafford Cripps was sent to India.
2.Statements A, B and C are incorrect. No committee was formed for the stated purposes.",Hint 165,1,3
Which of the following changes was/were introduced by the Montagu - Chelmsford Reforms?1.The reserved subjects in the provinces were to be controlled by the ministers responsible to legislature.2.Bicameral legislature was introduced at the centre.3.The Governor General and his executive council were made answerable to the legislature.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 and 3 only,2 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,2,"1.Statement 1 is incorrect: The Montagu-Chelmsford reforms introducedDyarchy at the provincial level, with reserved and transferred subject. The reserved subjects like finance and law and order remained under the control of Governor, administered through bureaucracy. The transferred subjects were brought under the control of ministers responsible to the legislatures.
2.Statement 2 is correct: It introduced bicameral legislature at the centre i.e. two houses of legislature. Lower house was the legislative assembly and the upper house was the council of state.
3.Statement 3 is incorrect: At the central level, the legislature had no control over Governor General and his executive council.",Hint 166,1,1
Bombay Plan during the Indian national movement refers to which of the following?,An initiative taken by British government to improve the economic condition of India.,A plan made by leading Indian industrialists for the development of the Indian economy.,Outcome of all party meeting held in Bombay to upgrade the economic status of India.,A plan to make Bombay as administrative capital of India.,2,"The Bombay Plan is the name commonly given to a World War II era set of proposals the development of the Post-Independence economy of India. Titled A Brief Memorandum Outlining a Plan of Economic Development for India, the signatories of the Plan wereJehangirRatanjiDadabhoy Tata,Ghanshyam Das Birla,ArdeshirDalal, Sri Ram,KasturbhaiLalbhai,ArdeshirDarabshaw Shroff, SirPurshottamdasThakurdas and John Mathai",Hint 167,1,2
"Which among the following statements is/are correct with respect to the acceptance of office by congress in provinces in 1937-39?1.Congress formed ministries in all the provinces.2.Mahatma Gandhi never supported the acceptance of ministries by congress members.3.Provincial Governments were formed as per the proposals of Government of India Act, 1935.Select the correct answer using the code given below.",1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,3 only,None,3,"1.Statement 1 is not correct. Elections were held in 11provinces ,The Indian National Congress emerged in power in eight of the provinces
- the three exceptions being Bengal, Punjab, and Sindh. The All-India Muslim League failed to form the government in any province.
2.Statement 2 is not correct. In the Working Committee discussionsGandhiji opposed office acceptance and posed the alternative of quiet preparation in the villages for the resumption of civil disobedience. But by the beginning of 1936 he felt that the latter was still not feasible; he was, therefore, willing to give a trial to the formation of Congress ministries, especially as the overwhelming mood of the party favoured this course.
3.Statement 3 is correct. As per the mandate of Govt. of India act 1935 election were held in 11 provinces under Govt. of India act 1935, partial reorganisation of the provinces happened Sindh was separated from Bombay, Bihar and Orissa was split into separate provinces of Bihar and Orissa",Hint 168,1,3
Consider the following statements regarding Forward Bloc:1.It was established as new party within the Congress by Subhash Chandra Bose.2.The formation of a new party led to Subhash Boses ouster from Congress. Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"1.Statement 1 is correct. In May, 1939,Subhash Bose and his followers formed the Forward Bloc as a new party within the Congress.
2.Statement 2 is incorrect. Bose declared All India protest against an AICC resolution. This attracted disciplinary action not his move to form Forward Bloc. Also he was not ousted from party. He was removed from Bengal Provincial Congress Committee and was debarred from holding any office in Congress for 3 years.",Hint 169,1,1
Which of the following was/were the the weakness of the Ghadar movement?1.Its underestimation of the Britishs power and its lack of adequate preparedness.2.Its failure to generate an effective and sustained leadership.3.It had a weak organizational structure.4.It was predominantly religious idea with leadership derived mainly from Sikh groups.Select the correct answer using the codes given below.,1 and 4 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 3 and 4 only","1, 2 and 3 only",4,"1.Statements 1, 2 and 3 are correct as: Their weakness lay in their lack of preparedness. They had underestimated the might of British. AlsoLalaHardayal though a propagandist and inspirer, was not adept at organizing a movement at that scale. Their organizational structure was also weak.
2.Statement 4 is not correct. Though a majority of the leaders of theGhadar Movement, and most of the participants were drawn from among the Sikhs, the ideology that was created and spread through theGhadar and other publications was strongly secular in tone.",Hint 170,1,2
Consider the following statements about the Mappila (moplah) revolt:1.The Muslim tenants revolted against the Hindu landlords.2.They were opposed by the local congress body.3.It was violent in nature.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 and 3 only,2 only,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"1.Mappila Revolt- TheMappilas were the Muslim tenants inhabiting the Malabar region where most of the landlords were Hindus. TheMappilas had expressed their resentment against the oppression of the landlords during the nineteenth century also. Their grievances centredaround lack of security of tenure, high rents, renewal fees and other oppressive exactions.
2.TheMappila tenants were particularly encouraged by the demand of the local Congress body for a government legislation regulating tenant-landlord relations. Soon, theMappila movement merged with the ongoingKhilafat agitation. The leaders of theKhilafat - Non- Cooperation Movement like Gandhi,Shaukat Ali andMaulana Azad addressedMappila meetings. After the arrest of national leaders, the leadership passed into the hands of localMappila leaders.
3.Things took a turn for the worse in August 1921 when the arrest of a respected priest leader, AliMusaliar, sparked off large - scale riots. Initially, the symbols of British authority-courts, police stations, treasuries and offices- and unpopular landlords (jenmies who were mostly Hindus) were the targets. But once the British declared martial law and repression began in earnest, the character of the rebellion underwent a definite change.
4.Many Hindus were seen by theMappilas to be helping the authorities. What began as an anti-government and anti - landlord affair acquired communal overtones. The communalization of the rebellion completed the isolation of theMappilas from theKhilafat- Non- Cooperation Movement. By December 1921, all resistance had come to an end.",Hint 171,1,3
"With reference to the Harijan campaign of Gandhiji, consider the following statements:1.The campaign was launched immediately after Non Cooperation Movement.2.Gandhiji opposed the activities of Harijan Sevak Sangh initiated by educated Dalit community including BR Ambedkar.3.Gandhiji asked masses to go against traditional shastras if it promoted untouchability.Select the correct answer from the code given below.",1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Statement 1 is incorrect. TheHarijan campaign aimed at root and branch eradication of untouchability practice. It was launched byGandhiji post signing of Poona Pact in 1932. Non Cooperation Movement was during 1919 to 1922.
2.Statement 2 is incorrect asGandhiji actively supported the activities ofHarijanSewakSangh and even collected donations for the same.
3.Statement 3 is correct.Gandhiji gave utmost respect to traditional literature andshastras but if it propagated the untouchability practice, it was to be contradicted in every means.",Hint 172,1,1
Consider the following plans with regard to transfer of power during British rule:1.Wavell Plan2.Mountbatten plan3.Cabinet Mission PlanArrange the above plans in correct chronological order.,1/3/2002,1/2/2003,2/3/2001,3/2/2001,1,"1.On June 14, 1945, Lord Wavell came out with Balkanisation plan.
2.The Cabinet Mission came to India in March 1946 to negotiate the setting up of a national government and to set into motion machinery for transfer of powerIt was against Cabinet Mission proposal to set into motion a machinery for transfer of power to Indian dominion.
3.On March 22, 1947 Mountbatten came as the last Viceroy and charged with the task of Winding up the Raj by 30th June 1948. Mountbattens formula was to divide India but retain maximum unity.",Hint 173,1,2
Which of the following activities were associated with Swadeshi Movement?1.Use of traditional festivals and melas for nationalism2.Emphasis on Atmasakti or self-reliance3.Boycott of foreign goods4.Use of samitis or corps of volunteers. Select the correct answer using the code given below.,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 3 and 4 only",2 and 4 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",4,"1.Statement 1 is correct. The Swadeshi period saw the creative use of traditional popular festivals and melas as a means of reaching out to the masses. The Ganapati andShivaji festivals, popularized byTilak, became a medium for Swadeshi propaganda not only in Western India but also in Bengal. Traditional folk theatre forms such asjatras are extensively used in disseminating the Swadeshi message in an intelligible form to vast sections of the people, many of whom were being introduced to modern political ideas for the first time.
2.Statement 2 is correct. Another important aspect of the Swadeshi Movement was the great emphasis given to self-reliance or Atmasakti as a necessary part of the struggle against the government.Self reliance in various fields meant the re-asserting of national dignity,honor and confidence.
3.Statement 3 is correct. Among the several forms of struggle thrown up by the movement, it was the boycott of foreign goods which met with the greatest visible success at the practical and popular level. Boycott and public burning of foreign cloth, picketing of shops selling foreign goods, all became common in remote corners of Bengal as well as in many important towns and cities throughout the country. Women refused to wear foreign bangles and use foreign utensils,washermen refused to wash foreign clothes and even priests declined offerings which contained foreign sugar.
4.Statement 4 is correct. Corps of volunteers (orsamitis as they were called) were another major form of mass mobilization widely used by the Swadeshi Movement. The SwadeshBandhabSamiti set up by Ashwini KumarDutt, a school teacher, in Barisal was the mostwell known volunteer organization of them all.",Hint 174,1,3
"With reference to the All India Kisan Congress (AIKC), consider the following statements:1.It was established in Lucknow with Swami Sahajanand as its president.2.Jawaharlal Nehru, Indulal Yagnik and Jayaprakash Narayan were associated with AIKC.3.The Kisan manifesto of AIKC influenced the agrarian programme adopted by Congress at its Faizpur session.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Statement 1 is correct: All-IndiaKisan Congress was established in Lucknow in April 1936 which later changed its name to the All IndiaKisan Sabha. SwamiSahajanand, the militant founder of the Bihar ProvincialKisan Sabha (1929), was elected the President, and N.G.Ranga, the pioneer of theKisan Movement in Andhra and a renowned scholar of the agrarian problem, the General Secretary.
2.Statement 2 is correct: The first session was greeted in person by Jawaharlal Nehru. Other participants included Ram ManoharLohia,Sohan Singh Josh,IndulalYagnik,Jayaprakash Narayan,MohanlalGautam, Kamal Sarkar,SudhinPramanik and Ahmed Din.
3.Statement 3 is correct: AKisan Manifesto was finalized at the All-IndiaKisan Committee session in Bombay and formally presented to the Congress Working Committee to be incorporated into its forthcoming manifesto for the 1937 elections. TheKisan Manifesto considerably influenced the agrarian programme adopted by the Congress at itsFaizpur session, which included demands for fifty per cent reduction in land revenue and rent, a moratorium on debts, the abolition of feudal levies,security of tenure for tenants, a living wage for agricultural labourers, and the recognition of peasant unions.",Hint 175,1,1
"On the eve of launch of Quit India Movement, Mahatma Gandhi gave some specific instructions to different groups of people. With reference to these instructions, consider following statements:1.He asked the government servants to resign.2.He asked the soldiers to leave their posts.3.He asked the princes of the Princely states to accept the sovereignty of their own people.Which of the above statement is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.Statement 1 was incorrect:Gandhiji asked governmentservents to openly declare theiralligiance to the congress and not to resign.
2.Statement 2 was incorrect:Gandhiji asked the soldiers to refuse to fire on their own people and not to leave their posts.
3.Statement 3 is correct:Gandhiji asked the princes of the Princely states to accept the sovereignty of their own people.",Hint 176,1,2
Consider the following movements:1.Kisan movement2.Akali movement3.Moplah revolt4.No tax movement at Guntur5.Deccan peasant riotsWhich of the above movements were impacted by the Non Cooperation Movement during 1920s?,"1, 4 and 5 only","1, 2 and 3 only","3, 4 and 5 only","1, 2, 3 and 4 only",4,"DeccanPesant Riots took place during 1870s having no relation with Non CooperationMovement(NCM). No tax movement at Guntur was peaceful movement during 1920s directed against the government. It was a part of NCM.Kisan Movement initiated in UP,Akali Movement in Punjab andMopilah revolt in Kerala. All of three wereindirecy impacted by the passions triggered by NCM. Hence option (d) is the correct answer.",Hint 177,1,3
Who among the following appeared at the historic Red Fort trials for the defence of INA prisoners?1.Bhaulabhai Desai2.Asaf Ali3.Vallabhai Patel4.K N KatjuSelect the correct answer using code given below.,1 and 2 only,3 and 4 only,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 2 and 4 only",4,"The defence of the INA prisoners was taken up by the Congress.Bhulabhaj Desai,Tej BahadurSapru, K.N.Katju, Nehru andAsaf Ali appeared in court at the historic Red Fort trials.",Hint 178,1,1
Consider the following statements with regard to Kisan Sabha Movement:1.Members of Home Rule League played instrumental role in mobilizing peasants to organize themselves into Kisan Sabha.2.The non-participation of high caste peasants eventually led to failure of this movement.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"1.Statement 1 is correct. It was active members of the Home Rule League in U.P. who initiated the process of the organization of the peasants of the province intoKisanSabhas.
2.Statement 2 is incorrect. The unity of high caste and low caste peasants was a marked feature of this movement.",Hint 179,1,2
Antonio Gramsci described war of position as a long-drawn out hegemonic struggle. Which of the following is example of this war of position?,American war of Independence,French revolution,Indian struggle for independence,None of the above,3,"Indian national movement was a concrete example of long grown out hegemonic struggle in which state power is seized through prolonged political process in which counter-hegemony againstBritishers was built up over the year through the different mass movements followed by the mass awakening truce. In others state power is seized in a single historical moment of revolution, like American war of independence etc.",Hint 180,1,3
Consider the following pairs:MovementResponse by Gandhiji1. Ahmedabad Mill strike: advised the workers to go on a strike and to demand a hike in wages2. Kheda Satyagraha: advised the peasants to withhold payment of revenue3. Rowlatt Satyagraha: founded Satyagraha Sabhas whose members would disobey the act and court arrestWhich of the above pairs is/are correctly matched?,1 and 2 only,2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.All the 3 pairs are correctly matched.
2.At Ahmedabad mill strike,Gandhiji advised the workers to go on a strike against their mill owners and to demand a 35% increase in wages. He himself undertook a fast onto death.
3.AtKheda,Gandhiji advised the peasants to withhold payment of revenue till their demands for remission were met.
4.To protest against theRowlatt act,Gandhiji formed the SatyagrahaSabhas whose members would disobey the act and get themselves arrested.",Hint 181,1,1
Consider the following pairs:CommitteeObjective1. Butler committee: to clarify the relationship between the British crown and the Princely states.2. Hunter Committee: to report on development of local self-government3. Hartog Committee: to look into the Punjab wrongsWhich of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?,1 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"1.Pair 1 is correct as the Indian states committee or Butler committee in 1927 was appointed to investigate and clarify the relationship between the paramount power and the Princes.
2.Pairs 2 and 3 are incorrect. While Hunter Committee was formed to enquire the Punjab wrongs and actions ofgeneral Dyer,Hartog Committee was constituted in 1929 to assess the state of education.",Hint 182,1,2
Which of the following leaders were the founders of Congress Socialist Party?1.Jayaprakash Narayan2.Acharya Narendra Dev3.Jawaharlal Nehru4.Subhash Chandra BoseSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 4 only,1 and 2 only,3 and 4 only,"1, 2 and 3 only",2,"The Congress Socialist Party (CSP) was formed at Bombay in October 1934 under the leadership ofJayaprakash Narayan, Acharya Narendra Dev andMinooMasani.Subhash Chandra Bose was not among the founding members.",Hint 183,1,3
Consider the following statements with regard to young revolutionaries of 1920s:1.Chandra Shekhar Azad was critical of socialist ideas.2.The Hindustan Republican Association was formed to organise an armed revolution.3.Bhagat Singh wanted to use the legislative assembly as a forum for debate and discussion.Which of the statements given above are not correct?,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Statement 1 is incorrect. Azad was more supportive of socialist ideas.
2.Statement 2 is correct. The Hindustan Republican Association was formed in 1924 to organise an armed revolution. But they became influenced by Socialist ideas. In 1928, under the leadership of ChandraShekhar Azad, they changed the name of their organisation to the Hindustan Socialist Republican Association.
3.Statement 3 is incorrect.Bhagat Singh wanted to use the court as a forum for revolutionary propaganda after they threw bomb in Parliament. He never made any attempt to be a part of Parliament and use it as a forum for debate and discussion.",Hint 184,1,1
Which of the following sections of masses actively participated in the Civil Disobedience Movement?1.Students2.Traders and commercial associations3.WorkersWhich of the statement given above is/are correct?,1 and 2 only,1 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.All the 3 given sections of masses participated actively in Civil Disobedience Movement. Youths especially the students played most prominent role in boycotting foreign cloths and in picketing.
2.Traders associations and commercial bodies were themselves quite active in implementing the boycott, as were the many mill owners who refused to use foreign yarn and pledged not to manufacture coarse cloth that competed with khadi.
3.Workers actively joined numerous mass demonstrations in Bombay, Calcutta and Madras and were in forefront in Sholapur.",Hint 185,1,2
"With reference to Communist Party of India during national movement, consider the following statements:1.It was set up in Tashkent in 1920, by M. N. Roy.2.It aimed to create a new radical organisation parallel to Indian National Congress and work separately.Which of the statement given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,1,"1.Statement 1 is correct. Seven Indians, headed by M.N. Roy, met at Tashkent in October 1920 and set up a Communist Party of India.
2.Statement 2 is incorrect. The CPI called upon all its members toenroll themselves as members of the Congress, form a strong left-wing in all its organs, cooperate with all other radical nationalists, and make an effort to transform the Congress into a more radical mass-based organization.",Hint 186,1,3
Consider the following pairs:Nationalist LeadersNews Paper1. Surendra Nath Banerjee:Amrit Bazar Patrika2. G. Subramaniya Aiyer:Swadesimitran3. Bal Gangadhar Tilak:Kesari4. Sishir Kumar Ghosh :BengaleeWhich of the above pairs is/are correctly matched?,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 3 and 4 only","1, 2, 3 and 4",2,"The correct match is:
1.SurendraNath Banerjee:Bengalee
2.G.SubramaniyaAiyer:Swadesimitran
3.BalGangadharTilak:Kesari
4.Sishir Kumar Ghosh:Amrit BazaarPartika",Hint 187,1,1
Who were called as the responsivists during the Indian national movement?,A group which was influenced by socialist and communist ideas.,A group which wanted to organise an armed revolt against the colonial government.,A group which promoted communal harmony.,A group which offered support to the government for the protection of Hindu interests. ,4,"Responsivists like Madan MohanMalviya,LalaLajpat Rai and N. C.Kelkar offered to cooperate with the governments to secure the so called Hindu interests.",Hint 188,1,2
"With reference to freedom struggle, the Bakasht lands were:",Lands which the occupancy tenants had lost to zamindars due to nonpayment of rent.,Lands which were exempted from payment of land revenue.,lands which were given to the Europeans for indigo plantation.,Lands in which the cultivators were recognised as owners.,1,"Bakasht lands were those which the occupancy tenants had lost tozamindars, mostly during the Depression years, by virtue ofnonpayment of rent, and which they often continued to cultivate as share-croppers. The Congress Ministry had initiated legislation for the reduction of rent and the restoration ofBakasht lands. But the formula that was finally incorporated in the legislation on the basis of an agreement with thezamindars did not satisfy the radical leaders of thekisan Sabha. The legislation gave a certain proportion of the lands back to the tenants on condition that they pay halfthe auction price of the land. Besides, certain categories of land had been exempted from the operation of the law. TheBakasht lands issue became a major ground of contention between theKisan Sabha and the Congress Ministry.",Hint 189,1,3
"Congress formally announced its changed policy towards princely states, from that of non intervention to removal of any self imposed constraint on its participation in the princely states, at the:","Nagpur session, 1920","Lahore session, 1929","Tripuri session, 1939","Haripura session, 1938",3,"Due to increase in the political awakening in the states in 1938-39, evident in the formation ofPrajamandals in many states and major struggles for reforms in states like Rajkot, Jammu and Kashmiretc, Congress at its Tripuri session 1939 announced its changed policy towards the states.",Hint 190,1,1
Champaran Satyagraha was launched against the:,Refusal of the government to remit land revenue in light of the crop failure.,Exploitation of peasants working on indigo plantations by the European planters.,Withdrawal of plague bonus given to the workers.,Increase in land revenues imposed by the colonial government in the district.,2,"Gandhis first great experiment insatyagraha came in 1917 inChamparan, a district in Bihar. The peasantry on the indigo plantations in the district was excessively oppressed by the European planters. They were compelled to grow indigo on at least 3/20th of their land and to sell it at prices fixed by the planters.",Hint 191,1,2
Which of the following were part of fundamental rights resolution passed at the Karachi session of Indian National Congress?1.Freedom of speech and expression2.Neutrality of state in religious affairs3.Universal adult franchisee4.Right to propertySelect the correct answer using code given below.,1 and 4 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3 only","1, 2, 3 and 4",3,"The Karachi session of 1931 became memorable for its resolution on Fundamental Rights. The resolution guaranteed the basic civil rights of free speech, free press, free assembly, and freedom of association; equality before the law irrespective of caste, creed or sex; neutrality of the state in regard to all religions; elections on the basis of universal adult franchise; and free and compulsory primary education.",Hint 192,1,3
Gandhiji formed the Passive Resistance Association in South Africa to campaign against:,Restrictions on Indian migration,Mandatory carrying of registration certificates for Indians,Poll tax imposed on all ex-indentured labourers,Invalidation of Indian marriages,2,A new legislation in South Africa made it compulsory for Indians there to carry at all times certificates of registration with their fingerprints. The Indians underGandhijis leadership decided not to submit to this discriminatory measure.Gandhiji formed the Passive Resistance Association to conduct the campaign.,Hint 193,1,1
Consider the following statements with regard to Swadeshi Movement:1.The militant nationalists wanted to restrict the movement in the Bengal unlike the Moderates.2.The moderates wanted to boycott only foreign goods unlike the extremists who wanted to boycott every form of cooperation with government.Which of statements given above is/are correct?,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"1.Statement 1 is incorrect: The militant nationalists wanted the movement to be taken outside Bengal unlike the Moderates who wanted it to restrict it to the Bengal as they did not believe in the capacity of the masses.
2.Statement 2 is correct: The moderates wanted to boycott only foreign goods unlike the extremists who wanted to go beyond and extend the boycott from foreign goods to every form of association or cooperation with the colonial Government.",Hint 194,1,2
Which of the following pairs are correctly matched?Mission/ meetingObjective/ outcome1. August offer: to seek Indian support for Britain in WW-II2. Shimla conference: to discuss and approve Wavell Plan3. AICC meeting in Bombay 1942: ratification of Quit India ResolutionSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,1 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Pair 1: Correct, On 8 August 1940, the Viceroy of India, Lord Linlithgow, made the August Offer, a fresh proposal promising the expansion of the Executive Council to include more Indians, the establishment of an advisory war council, giving full weight to minority opinion, and the recognition of Indians right to frame their own constitution (after the end of the war). In return, it was hoped that all parties and communities in India would cooperate in Britains war effort.
2.Pair 2: Correct. TheSimla Conference 1945 was a meeting between the Viceroy and the major political leaders of British India atSimla, convened to agree on and approve the Wavell Plan for Indian self-government.
3.Pair 3: Correct, first time the decision to launch the struggle was taken at meeting atwardha onjuly 1942, but the august meeting atGowalia tank inbombay witnessed ratification of the decision, where Gandhiadressed the crowd and raised the slogan Do or Die.",Hint 195,1,3
"Consider the following provisions of the Government of India Act, 1935:1.The establishment of an All India Federation2.Provincial Autonomy3.Dyarchy at the centreWhichof the above features were not implemented?",1 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.The federal part of the Act andDyarchy at the centre were never introduced but the provincial part was soon put into operation. Provincial autonomy came into effect from 1937. The first elections for provinces under the act were held in 1937.
2.For the implementation of All India Federation, consent of half of the princely states was required.",Hint 196,1,1
Consider the following statements with regard to Individual Satyagraha:1.Jawaharlal Nehru was first satyagrahi followed by Vinoba Bhave.2.Subhah Bose gave the slogan Chalo Delhi during this movement to mobilize people.3.It gave expression to Indian sentiments that they did not support British in the 2nd World War.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,2 and 3 only,1 and 2 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Statement 1 is incorrect. First Satyagrahi wasVinobaBhave, while Nehru was the second one.
2.Statement 2 is incorrect. Chalo Delhi slogan was given bySubhash Bose in 1944 during INAs march towards India. During the Individual Satyagraha, the Satyagrahi would give a speech at a place and move to another place while trekking towards Delhi. Thus this movement toward the capital waspopulalry called DelhiChalo.
3.Statement 3 is correct. This movement gave expression to Indian peoples strong political feeling about their non-allegience to British in the war.",Hint 197,1,2
Which of the following statements is/are correct regarding the policy of carrot and stick used by the British?1.It was a policy of repression followed by conciliation and further suppression.2.It was used to create a split between the moderates and extremists in the Congress.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"1.The policy of the carrot and the stick was adopted by John Morley, the Secretary of State for India, in 1907. Instead of sneering at the Moderates, the policy was to be that of rallying them. Statement 1 is correct. The policy, known as the policy of the carrot and the stick, was to be a three pronged one. It may be described as a policy of repression-conciliation-suppression.
2.Statement 2 is correct. The Extremists, were to be repressed, though mildly in the first stage, the purpose being to frighten the moderates. The moderates were then to be placated through some concessions and promises and hints were to be given that further concessions would be forthcoming if they disassociated themselves from the Extremists.",Hint 198,1,3
The main reason behind the the Bardoli Satyagrah in 1928 was:,Occurrence of floods and famine in Gujarat,Increase in land revenue by British Officials,Exploitation of farmers by zamindars,Non declaration of bonus for factory workers ,2,BardoliSatyagrah was organised against the proposed 30% increase in land revenue. The peasants organised No Tax Campaign under the leadership ofSardarvallabhbhai Patel and in the end won their demand.,Hint 199,1,1
Which of the following statements is correct in context of Eka Movement?,It actively advocated for abolition of Zamindari System in UP.,It wanted the confiscation of excess lands with land lords and security of tenure for peasants.,It was not radical in character and only demanded to stop extraction of high rent.,It was propagated by Hindu landlords for infusing hatred against the British rule,3,"1.Eka movement was anon radical response of people in rural areas of Avadh. The main grievance was relating to the extraction of a rent that was generally 50 percent higher than the recorded rent. Congress andKhilafat leaders provided the initial thrust to the peasant grievances and the movement grew under the nameEka or unity movement.
2.They did not advocate for abolition of Zamindari System. They merely argued for paying the actual rent on time and insulation from oppressive tendencies ofZamindars. Hence option (c) is the correct answer.",Hint 200,1,2
Consider the following statements with regard to Revolutionary nationalists in earl 20th century:1.Revolutionary nationalism grew as an aftermath of decline of the Swadeshi movement.2.They tried to bring revolution through mass mobilisation.3.Revolutionary nationalists were not only inspired by the events in the global world but also established their centres abroad.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 2 only,2,"1.Statement 1 is correct: The government was successful in curbing the Swadeshi movement but the upsurge of nationalist sentiments could not die. People had been aroused from their slumber of centuries; they had learned to take a bold and fearless attitude in politics. Government repression and frustration caused by the failure of the leadership to provide a positive lead to the people ultimately resulted in revolutionary terrorism. The youth of Bengal found all avenues of peaceful protest and political action blocked and out of desperation they fell back upon individual heroic action and the cult of bomb.
2.Statement 2 is incorrect: The revolutionary nationalists did not try to generate a mass revolution instead they tried to copy the methods of the Irish terrorists and Russian nihilists, that is, to assassinate unpopular officials through individual actions.
3.Statement 3 iscorrect : The revolutionary terrorists were inspired by many of the global events such as Russian revolution etc. The revolutionary terrorists also established centres abroad. The more famous of them wereShyamjiKrishnavarma, V. D.Savarkar andHarDayal in London and MadameCama andAjit Singh in Europe.",Hint 201,1,3
Who among the following was/were President(s) of Indian National Congress during the freedom struggle?1.Annie Besant2.Sarojini Naidu3.Kadambini GangulySelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,1 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"1.Annie Besant was the president of Calcutta session of 1917.
2.Sarojini Naidu was the president of Kanpur session of 1925.
3.KadambiniGanguly was not a president of INC session. She addressed the congress session in 1890. She was the first women graduate of CalcuttaUniversity.</span",Hint 202,1,1
Which among the following was/were the reasons for the decline of the revolutionary nationalist movement during 1930s?1.Lack of social base among the masses.2.Repression by British government.3.Lack of a central leadership.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Statement 1 is correct. The revolutionaries failed in their stated objective of leading a mass-base struggle or failed even to establish contact with the masses. The politics of the revolutionary nationalists had severe limitations. It could not mobilize the masses. In fact, it had no base among the people. They believed in individual heroism.
2.Statement 2 is correct. Governments strong action gradually decimated the revolutionary ranks. With the death ofChandrashekar Azad on 27 February 1931 in an encounter with the police in a public park at Allahabad, the revolutionary movement in northern India came to a virtual end. Surya Sens martyrdom marked the virtual collapse of revolutionary terrorism in Bengal.
3.Statement 3 is correct. The different revolutionary groups had different objectives and they worked in isolated groups with no central leadership.",Hint 203,1,2
Which of the following were part of Gandhi- Irwin pact of 1931?1.Release of all the political prisoners not convicted of violence2.Public enquiry into police excesses3.Suspension of Civil Disobedience MovementSelect the correct answer using the codes given below.,1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"GANDHI-IRWIN PACT On January 25, 1931 Gandhi and all other members of the CWC were released unconditionally. The CWC authorised Gandhi to initiate discussions with the viceroy. As a result of these discussions, a pact was signed between the viceroy, representing the British Indian Government, and Gandhi, representing the Indian people, in Delhi on February 14, 1931. This Delhi Pact, also known as the Gandhi-Irwin Pact, placed the Congress on an equal footing with the Government. Irwin on behalf of the Government agreed on immediate release of all political prisoners not convicted of violence;
1.Remission of all fines not yet collected;
2.Return of all lands not yet sold to third parties;
3.Lenient treatment to those government servants who had resigned;
4.Right to make salt in coastal villages for personal consumption (not for sale);
5.Right to peaceful and non-aggressive picketing; and
6.Withdrawal of emergency ordinances.
The viceroy, however, turned down two of Gandhis demands- (i) public inquiry into police excesses, and (ii) commutation ofBhagat Singh and his comrades death sentence to life sentence.
Gandhi on behalf of the Congress agreed:
7.To suspend the civil disobedience movement, and
8.to participate in the next RTC on the constitutional question around the three lynch-pins of federation, Indian responsibility, and reservations and safeguards which may be necessary for Indias interests (covering such areas as defence, external affairs, position of minorities, financial credit of India and discharge of other obligations).",Hint 204,1,3
Which of the following were related to Non-cooperation Movement?1.Volunteer Corps2.Parallel Governments3.Gandhi - Reading talksSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 3 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.During NCM 1920 Congress volunteer corps emerged as the parallel police.
2.Talks between Gandhi and Reading, the viceroy, broke down in May 1921 as the Government wanted Gandhi to urge the Ali brothers to remove those portions from speeches which suggested violence. Gandhi realised that the Government was trying to drive a wedge between him and theKhilafat leaders and refused to fall into the trap. In December, the Government came down heavily on the protestors. Volunteer corps were declared illegal, public meetings were banned, the press was gagged and most of the leaders barring Gandhi were arrested. Hence 1 and 3 are correct.
3.Parallel Government were present during CDM 1930 - Sholapur QIM 1942 - Ballia,Tamluk,Satara. 1879- Poona byVasudevBalvantPhadke. Hence 2 is incorrect.",Hint 205,1,1
"Withreferencetotheviewsof the Swarajist sectionof theCongress, consider the following statements:1. Theyadvocatedparticipationof Congress in the legislature.2.They were opposed to the idea of mass struggle to attain independence.3.Jawahar Lal Nehru supported the ideas of the Swarajists.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"1.Statement 1 is correct. Swarajists advocated the revival of the constitutional method of struggle and participation in the elections to the Central Legislative Assembly to be held in 1934. Led this time by Dr. M.A. Ansari,Asaf Ali,Satyamurthy,Bhulabhai Desai and B.C. Roy, the new Swarajists argued that in a period of political apathy and depression, when the Congress was no longer in a position to sustain a mass movement, it was necessary to utilize elections and work in the legislative councils to keep up the political interest and morale of the people.
2.Statement 2 is not correct. However, this did not amount, they said, to having faith in the capacity of constitutional politics to achieve freedom. It only meant opening up another political front which would help build up the Congress, organizationally extend its influence, and prepare the people for the next mass struggle.
3.Statement 3 is not correct. There were sharp differences between Nehru and the leftists on the one side and proponents of council-entry on the other. To Nehru, the withdrawal of the Civil Disobedience Movement and council-entry or the recourse to constructive programmes represented a spiritual defeat and a surrender of ideals.",Hint 206,1,2
"With reference to the national freedom struggle, what does Jatiya Sarkar refer to?",An organization that carried out underground revolutionary activities.,A parallel government formed during the Quit India Movement.,A committee that carried out mass struggle in Princely States.,An interim government formed after resignation of congress ministries in 1939.,2,"1.A significant feature of the Quit India Movement was the emergence of what came to be known as parallel governments in some parts of the country. The first one was proclaimed in Ballia, in East U P, in August 1942 under the leadership ofChittuPande, who called himself a Gandhian.
2.InTamluk in theMidnapur district of Bengal, theJatiya Sarkar came into existence on 17 December, 1942 and lasted till September 1944. TheJatiya Sarkar undertook cyclone relief work, gave grants to schools and organized an armedVidyutVahini. It also set up arbitration courts and distributed the surplus paddy of the well to-do to the poor. Being located in a relatively remote area, it could continue its activities with comparative ease.",Hint 207,1,3
The Pledge of Independence was officially promulgated during which of the following movements?,"Swadeshi Movement, 1905","Non-cooperation Movement, 1920","Civil Disobedience Movement, 1930","Quit India Movement, 1942",3,"1.The Pledge of Independence Declaration ofPurna Swaraj was read at Lahore Congress on January 26, 1930.
2.The Indian Declaration of Independence of 26 December 1929 boldly stated: We believe that it is the inalienable right of the Indian people, as of any other people, to have freedom and to enjoy the fruits of their toil and have the necessities of life, so that they may have full opportunities of growth. We believe also that if any government deprives people of these rights and oppresses them; the people have a further right to alter it or to abolish it. The British Government in India has not only deprived the Indian people of their freedom but has based itself on the exploitation of the masses, and has ruined India economically, politically, culturally and spiritually. We believe therefore, that India must severe the British connection and attainPurna Swaraj or complete independence.
3.The Congress declared 26 January 1930 as Independence Day, when the Declaration of Independence was officially promulgated.",Hint 208,1,1
"With reference to the role of women in Indian National Movement and reforms related to them, which of the statements given below is not correct?",Nari Bahinis or women brigades were formed during Tebhaga movement to resist colonial police.,"The Government of India Act, 1935 provided reserved seats for women in the provincial legislatures.","Womens Indian Association, the first women association at all India level was established under the leadership of Sarojini Naidu.","The Rani of Jhansi Regiment, the Women Regiment of the Indian National Army was led by Laxmi Sehgal.",4,"1.Tebhaga movement saw involvement of women at high level. It saw widespread autonomous action of the proletariat and semi proletariat women:, belonging todalit and tribal communities. Through their own initiative they formedNariBahinis or womens brigades and resisted the colonial police with whatever weapon they could lay their hands on.
2.The Government of India Act of 1935 were granted reservation in 41 seats in the provincial legislatures as well as limited reservation in central legislature.
3.Womens Indian Association was started by enlightened European and Indian ladies, the most important being Margaret Cousins and Annie Besant.
4.The Rani of Jhansi Regiment was the Womens Regiment of the Indian National Army, the armed force formed by Indian nationalists in 1942 in Southeast Asia with the aim of overthrowing the British Raj in colonial India , with Japanese assistance. It was one of the very few all-female combat regiments of the Second World War on any side. Led by Captain LakshmiSwaminathan (better known as Lakshmi Sehgal), the unit was raised in July 1943 with volunteers from the expatriate Indian population in South East Asia The unit was named the Rani of Jhansi Regiment after Lakshmi Bai, Rani of Jhansi",Hint 209,1,2
Lala Lajpat Rai is associated with which of the following?1.Agitation against Simon commission2.Servants of People society3.Arya SamajSelect the correct answer using the codes given below.,1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.LalaLajpat Rai was one of the leaders of theAnti Simon Commissionagitation.During the agitationLalaLajpat Rai received severe blows on his chest in October 1928 which proved fatal and he died on November 17, 1928.
2.Servants of the People Society was founded byLalaLajpat Rai in 1921 at Lahore, which was inaugurated by Mahatma Gandhi.
3.LalaLajpat Rai was a devotee of AryaSamaj and was editor of Arya Gazette, which he set up during his student time. He was actively associated with the management of the Punjab National Bank in its early years.",Hint 210,1,3
"With reference to Champaran Satyagraha,consider the following statements:1.It was during this movement that Gandhiji formulated the policy of Satyagraha.2.At Champaran, the cultivators were forced to cultivate under the tinkathia system.3.Rajendra Prasad and J.B. Kriplaniparticipated in this satyagraha.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 3 only,2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"Statement 1 is not correct. Gandhi evolved the technique of satyagraha during his stay in South Africa. It was based on truth andnon violence. Its basic tenets are:
1.A satyagrahi was not to submit to what he considered as wrong, but was to always remain truthful, non-violent and fearless.
2.He should be ready to accept suffering in his struggle against the evil doer. This suffering was to be a part of his love for truth.
3.Even while carrying out his struggle against the evil doer, a true satyagrahi would love the evil-doer; hatred would be alien to his nature.
4.A true satyagrahi would never bow before the evil, whatever the consequence.
5.Only the brave and strong could practise satyagraha, which was not for the weak and cowards. Even violence was preferred to cowardice. Thought was never to be separated from practice.
Statement 2 is correct.Gandhiji was requested byRajkumar Shukla to look into the problems of the indigo planters, ofChamparan in Bihar. The European planters had been forcing peasants to grow indigo on 3/20 of the total land (calledtinkathia system). WhenGandhiji reachedChamparan to probe into the matter, the authorities ordered him to leave the area at once.Gandhiji defied the order and preferred to face the punishment. This passive resistance or civil disobedience of an unjust order was a novel method at that time.
Statement 3 is correct.Gandhiji was joined byRajendra Prasad,Mazhar-ul-haq,Mahadeo Desai,Narhari Parekh, J. B.Kriplani in the movement.",Hint 211,1,1
Quit India movement was not characterized by which of the following?,The emergence of parallel governments in some parts of the country was witnessed.,It marked a new high in terms of popular participation in the national movement.,The British Government reacted to the movement with severe repression.,It was non-violent in character throughout the country.,4,"Three broad phases can be distinguished in the Quit India Movement:
1.Predominantly urban phase;
2.Countrywide movements, which saw the installation of a number of local national governments (Tamluk,Satara,Talcher and Ballia) ; and
3.Terrorist activities by educated youth. Significance:
The Quit India Movement marked a new high in terms of popular participation in the national movement and the youth were in the forefront of the struggle. Women especially college and school girls, played a very important role.ArunaAsaf Ali andSuchetaKripalani were two major women organizers of the underground, and Usha Mehta an important member of the small group that ran the Congress Radio.
Peasants of all strata were the heart of the movement especially in East U.P. and Bihar,Midnapur in Bengal,Satara in Maharashtra, Andhra, Gujarat and Kerala. A significant feature of the pattern of peasant activity was its total concentration on attacking symbols of British authority and a total lack of any incidents of anti-zamindar violence. Thus it was not a non-violent movement.",Hint 212,1,2
Which of the following nationalist organisation was/were setup during the swadeshi movement?1.Bengal National College2.National Council of Education3.Bengal Technical InstituteSelect the correct answer using the codes given below,1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Swadeshi movement was initiated against the partition of Bengal in 1905. It was led by extremist of Indian National Congress and had support of the moderates as well.
2.It led to boycott of British goods likeliverpool salt, Manchester cloth etc. The protest againstbritish goods led to dropping ofbritish textile y five to fifteen times.
3.However, the most important aspect of the movement was focus onself reliance oratma-shakti which led to development of indigenous industries and nationalistic institutes like Bengal National College founded byAurobindo Ghosh, Bengal Technical Institute, National council of Education. Funds were also raised to send students Japan for advanced learning.",Hint 213,1,3
"With reference to the plan proposed by C Rajagopalachari, consider the following statements:1.The plan intended to resolve the deadlock between the Congress and the British government2.The plan was endorsed by Mahatama Gandhi.3.It provided a plan for partition.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,3 only,2 and 3 only,4,"1.Rajagopalachari formula was an effort towards the Congress-League co-operation in constitutional reforms. In 1944 when it became clear that Allied would win, Indian nationalists decided to put pressure on the British. But at that time there was a deadlock between Congress and the Muslim League. The CR plan tried to resolve this deadlock. (statement 1 is not correct)
2.The plan was also endorsed by Gandhi. (statement 2 is correct)
3.After the end of the war, the entire population of Muslim majority areas in the North-West and North-East India were to decide by a plebiscite, whether or not to form a separate sovereign state. In case of acceptance of partition, agreement was to be made jointly for safeguarding defence, commerce, communications, etc. (statement 3 is correct). Jinnah wanted only the Muslims of North-West and North-East to vote in the plebiscite and not the entire population. He also opposed the idea of a common centre.",Hint 214,1,1
"Consider the following statements regarding the policies of Congress during the nationalmovement:1.To concentrate on Indias freedom struggle, it refrained from advocating for independence of other Asian and African countries.2.It always opposed the use of the Indias army and resources to serve British interests in Africa and Asia.3.In protest of British Imperialism, Congress initially supported the fascist governments in Japan, Germany and Italy.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Statement 1 is incorrect. Congress had gradually developed a foreign policy based on opposition to the spread of imperialism. So, it strongly advocated for independence of other Asian and African countries.
2.Statement 2 is correct. The Congress had always opposed the use of the Indian army and of Indias resources to serve British interests in Africa and Asia. The congress considered it a burden on Indian exchequer to further colonial aims.
3.Statement 3 is incorrect. It condemned fascism which had arisen in Italy, Germany and Japan as the most extreme form of imperialism and racialism and gave full support to the people of Ethiopia, Spain, Czechoslovakia, and China in their fight against aggression by the fascist powers.",Hint 215,1,2
"With reference to Non- cooperationmovement, consider the following statements:1.The policy of non- cooperation was adopted at the Lahore session of Indian National Congress.2.It called for boycott of elections to central and provincial assemblies.3.It was suspended due to violence at Chauri Chaura.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,1 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"Statement 1 is not correct: At its Nagpur session (December, 1920) the Congress approved and ratified the policy ofnon violentnon cooperation towards the unjust government. At Lahore session (1929), Congress adoptedPoorna Swaraj resolution.
Statement 2 is correct: The Indian National congress outlined a seven-item programme of non-cooperation.
1.Surrender of titles and honorary offices.
2.Refusal to attend government official and non-official functions.
3.Boycott of government and government-aided schools and colleges.
4.Boycott of British courts.
5.Refusal of all classes to offer themselves for service in Mesopotamia.
6.Boycott of elections to provincial and central assembly.
7.Boycott of British goods.
Statement 3 is correct: AtChauriChaura on 5 February 1922, the police stationed there fired at a group of demonstrators. The demonstrators retaliated by burning down the police station, which caused the death of twenty-two policemen.Gandhiji had all through the movement emphasized on peace and non-violence. After this incident he called off the movement.",Hint 216,1,3
Consider the following statements regarding Khilafat movement:1.It was led by Muhammad Ali and Shaukat Ali.2.It brought urban muslims into the fold of national movement.3.The movement was supported by the newspapers- Comrade and Al Hilal.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 and 2 only,1 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Statement 1 is correct. TheKhilafat movement was an agitation by Indian Muslims, allied with Indian nationalists, to pressure the British government to preserve the authority of the Ottoman Sultan as Caliph of Islam after World War I. The leadership included the Ali brothers Muhammad-Ali (1878-1931) andShaukat Ali (1873-1938) newspaper editors from Delhi; their spiritual guideMaulana Abdul Bari (1878- 1926) ofFirangi Mahal, Lucknow;AbulKalam Azad (1888-1958); andMaulana Mahmudul-Hasan (1851-1920), head of the madrasa atDeoband, in northern India.
2.Statement 2 is correct. TheKhilafat agitation brought urban Muslims into the nationalist movement and contributed to a sense of national unity as there was a predominant element of anti-imperialism in both the National andKhilafat Movement.
3.Statement 3 is correct. Comrade,Zamindar, AlHilalamdHamdard reflected the concerns of the educated Muslims during theKhilafat agitation. The helped inmaintaing the anti- British and pan-Islamic sentiments. The Comrade was a weekly English-language newspaper that was published and edited byMaulana Mohammad Ali between 1911 and 1914. The Al-Hilal (The Crescent) was a weekly Urdu language newspaper established byMaulanaAbulKalam Azad.",Hint 217,1,1
"In which of the following Gandhian movement, an internal intelligence wing was setup to secure intelligence about government moves and to shadow own errant members?",Bardoli Satyagraha,Kheda Satyagraha,Eka Movement,Champaran Satyagraha,1,"1.It was duringBardoli Satyagraha that an internal intelligence wing was created to gather information about future moves of government, and to shadow fellowpeasansts who were indecisive in not paying their dues.
2.The leadership of the movement was undertaken bySardarVallabh Bhai Patel, who divided thetaluq into thirteen workers camps orchhavanis each under the charge of an experienced leader.
3.The movement was launched against the irrational revised revenue assessment of the land by the government in thebardoli region.",Hint 218,1,2
"Which of the following was a result of the pressure from the allied nations towards seeking active cooperation of Indians, during the second world war?",August Offer,Cripps Mission,Wavell Plan,Cabinet Mission,2,"During theSecond World War, as the war situation worsened, President Roosevelt of the USA and President Chiang Kai-Shek of China as also the Labour Party leaders of Britain put pressure on Churchill to seek the active cooperation of Indians in the War. To secure this cooperation the British Government sent to India in March 1942 a mission headed by a Cabinet minister Stafford Cripps, a left wing Labourite who had earlier actively supported the Indian national movement",Hint 219,1,3
"With reference to the General Elections in 1945, consider the following statements:1.There was a debate between Swarajists and no-changers on the issue of contesting elections.2.The issue of INA trials was taken up in the election campaign by the Congress .3.The Muslim league performed badly ascompared to the elections of 1937. Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,2 only,1 and 3 only,3,"1.Statement 1 is incorrect. There was no such debate in 1945 election. The debate between Swarajists and no-changers was a characteristic of 1920s and 1930s elections.
2.Statement 2 is correct. The INA question was the main issue highlighted from the Congress platform in meetings held all over the country
- in fact, very often it was difficult to distinguish between an INA and an election meeting.
3.Statement 3 is incorrect. The Muslim league performed better compared to the elections of 1937. It gained 86.6% of themuslim votes and got majority in Bengal and Sindh. Compared to 1937 elections, the League clearly established itself as the dominant party among Muslims.",Hint 220,1,1
"With reference to the Wavell Plan of 1945, consider the following statements:1.Viceroys executive council was to be converted into interim government.2.Hindus and Muslims were to be given equal representation in the executive council.3.The Shimla conference was convened to discuss its provisions.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.The main proposals of the Wavell Plan were - With the exception of the governor-general and the commander-in-chief, all members of the executive council were to be Indians. Caste Hindus and Muslims were to have equal representation. Hence both statements 1 and 2 are correct.
2.Statement 3 is correct: To discuss the provisions of the Wavell Plan, 21 Indian political leaders were invited to the Shimla conference. The leaders includedMaulanaAbulKalam Azad and Mohammad Ali Jinnah.",Hint 221,1,2
"Congress condemned the Government of India Act, 1935 as totally disappointing but still it fought elections in 1937 with the objective of",Implementing Nehru report,Having a congressman as Prime Minister of India,Showing how unpopular the Act was,Formulation of constitution for Independent India,3,"The Congress decided to contest the elections under the Act of 1935, with the declared aim of showing how unpopular the Act was. The Actdidthave any provision for Prime Minister. The provisions of
Nehru report could not have been implemented through formation of provincial governments, for which election was conducted.",Hint 222,1,3
Government of India Act 1935 was the outcome of1.Simon Commission Report2.Nehru Report3.Third Round Table Conference.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"Among the principle sources from which the Government of India Act, 1935 drew its material were:
1.Indian Statutory Commission Report (popularly known as Simon Commission report),
2.The report of the All Parties Conference (the Nehru Report),
3.White paper issued after the discussions at the three round table conferences in 1933, which gave details of the working basis of the new constitution of India i.e.dyarchy at the Centre and responsible government.
4.The Joint select committee report and
5.The Lothian report, which determined the electoral provisions of the act.",Hint 223,1,1
With reference to Delhi Manifesto consider following statements:1.It demanded that the Round Table Conference should formulate a scheme for implementation of dominion status.2.Its rejection led to the demand of Purna Swaraj in Lahore session of INC.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"1.Statement 1 is correct: Delhi Manifesto - On November 2, 1929, a conference of prominent national leaders issued a Delhi Manifesto which demanded that the purpose of the Round Table Conference (RTC) should be to - formulate a scheme for implementation of the dominion status (thus acting as a constituent assembly) and the basic principle of dominion status should be immediately accepted; - that the Congress should have majority representation at the conference; - amnesty and a general policy of conciliation.
2.Statement 2 is correct: Viceroy Irwin rejected these demands on December 23, 1929, which led to the demand ofPurnaswaraj in Lahore session of INC.",Hint 224,1,2
"With reference to Ahmedabad Mill strike, consider the following statements:1.It was related to a dispute between the workers and the European mill owners regarding working hours.2.It was the first instance of a hunger-strike by Gandhiji in India.3.It led to the formation of Textile Labour Association.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 3 only,2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Statement 1 is not correct. It was related to a dispute between the workers and the Gujaratimillowners regarding the withdrawal of the plague-bonus, which was being given to dissuade workers from leaving the city in face of mounting plague-related deaths. This withdrawal came at a time when the workers were already facing hard times from the unusual high prices caused by World War I.
2.Statement 2 is correct.Gandhiji asked the workers to go on a strike and demand a 35% increase in wages.Gandhiji advised the workers to remain non-violent while on strike. He undertook a fast unto death to strengthen the resolve of workers. The fast also had the effect of putting pressure on mill owners who finally agreed to give the workers a 35% increase in wages. It was the first instance of a hunger-strike byGandhiji in India.
3.Statement 3 is correct. This movement went a long way in mobilizing and organising the working classes inAhemdabad, paving the way for foundation of the Textile Labour Association in February, 1920.",Hint 225,1,3
Which of the following statements is/are correct regarding the Left Movement of 1920s?1.It was critical of both Swarajists and constructive workers.2.It favoured complete independence.3.It worked within the Congress and remained integral part of National movement.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"Marxist and Socialist Ideas inspired many socialist and communist groups to come into existence and resulted in the rise of a left wing, within the Congress, represented by Jawaharlal Nehru andSubhash Bose. These young nationalists, inspired by the Soviet Revolution and dissatisfied with Gandhian ideas and political programme, began advocating radical solutions for economic, political and social ills of the country;
1.These younger nationalists
-were critical both of Swarajists and No-changers
-advocated a more consistent anti-imperialist line in the form of a slogan forpurnaswarajya (complete independence).
-were influenced by awareness, though still vague, of international currents
-stressed the need to combine nationalism and anti-imperialism with social justice and simultaneously raised the question of internal class oppression by capitalists and landlords.
Hence all the statements are correct.",Hint 226,1,1
"With reference to Wardha scheme of basiceducation, consider the following statements:1.It was inspired by Gandhian ideas in his weekly Harijan.2.The underlying principle behind this education was learning through activity.3.It received massive support from the masses and was continued in the later years.Which of the statements given above are correct?",1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"1.The Congress had organised a National Conference on Education in 1937 inWardha. In the light of the resolutions passed there,Zakir Hussain Committee formulated a detailed national scheme for basic education. The main principle behind this scheme was learning through activity. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
2.It was based onGandhijis ideas published in a series of articles in the weekly Harijan.Gandhiji thought that western education had created a gulf between the educated few and the masses and had also made the educated elite ineffective. Hence, statement 2 is correct.
3.FollowingWardha conference, a committee under Dr.Zakir Hussain was appointed to formulate the scheme of the basic education. The aim of the basic education was to develop the qualities of the ideal citizenship and more aspect should begive to the Indian culture than the literacy. Also, - There was no place for English in the curriculum. There was no place for religious education in this scheme. The scheme centred around manual productive work which might cover the remuneration of the teachers. It envisaged a seven year course through the mother tongue of the students.
4.There was not much development on the ideas of basic education laid down byWardha scheme because of the start of the Second World War and the resignation of Congress ministries in 1939. Hence, statement 3 is not correct.",Hint 227,1,2
Which among the following were part of Jinnahs fourteen demands?1.Separation of Sindh from Bombay2.Separate electrorates for muslims3.Federal constitution with residual power to provinces.4.One -third muslim representation in the Central legislature.Select the correct answer using the codegiven below.,"1, 2 and 4 only",1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",4,"The recommendations of the Nehru Report were not acceptable to Jinnah. He proposed certain amendments in the Nehru Report at the All Parties Conference held at Calcutta in 1928 but his demands were not accepted. Jinnah in 1929 gave fourteen points which were to become the basis of all future propaganda of the Muslim League.
The demands included:
1.Federal Constitution with residual powers to provinces.
2.Provincial autonomy.
3.No constitutional amendment by the centre without the concurrence of the states constituting the Indian federation.
4.All legislatures and elected bodies to have adequate representation of Muslims in every province without reducing a majority of Muslims in a province to a minority or equality.
5.Adequate representation to Muslims in the services and inself governing bodies.
6.One-third Muslim representation in the Central Legislature.
7.In any cabinet at the centre or in the provinces,onethird to be Muslims.
8.Separate electorates.
9.No bill or resolution in any legislature to be passed if three-fourths of a minority community consider such a bill or resolution to be against their interests.
10.Any territorial redistribution not to affect the Muslim majority in Punjab, Bengal and NWFP.
11.Separation of Sindh from Bombay.
12.Constitutional reforms in the NWFP and Baluchistan.
13.Full religious freedom to all communities.
14.Protection of Muslim rights in religion, culture, education and language.",Hint 228,1,3
Consider the following statements regarding Satyagraha Sabha:1.It was formed to protest Rowlatt Act.2.Members of Home Rule Leagues also joined Satyagraha sabha.3.It led to first mass strike  of  freedom struggle.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 only,1 and 2 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"Just when the nationalists were expecting post-War constitutional concessions, the Government came out with the repressiveRowlatt Act which the nationalists took as an insult. Gandhi called for a nationwide protest in February 1919. But soon, having seen the constitutional protest fail, Gandhi organised a Satyagraha Sabha and roped in younger members of Home Rule Leagues and the Pan Islamists. (Statement 1 and 2 correct). The forms of protest finally chosen included observance of a nationwidehartal (strike) accompanied by fasting and prayer, and civil disobedience against specific laws, and courting arrest and imprisonment. (Statement 3 correct). Hence all the statements are correct.",Hint 229,1,1
"Which of the following correctly describes the policy of Indian National Congress towards the Princely States, as enunciated in its resolution passed at Nagpur in 1920?1.It called upon Princes to grant responsible government in their States.2.It emphasized that no distinction was to be made between the people of British India and the Princely States.3.It supported the people of the states to undertake political activity as members of local Praja Mandals.Select the correct answer using the code given below.",1 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.The Congress, for the first time at its Nagpur Session in 1920, enunciated its policy towards the peoples-movement in the Princely States. It called upon the Princes to grant full responsible government in their States. Hence statement 1 is correct. However, it was pointed out that though the people belonging to the States couldenroll themselves as members of the Congress, they could not initiate political activity in the State in the name of the Congress. They could carry on political activity in their individual capacity as members of the localPrajaMandals. Hence statement 3 is correct.
2.This policy of non-intervention in princely states by Congress continued till 1938. Hence statement 2 is incorrect.",Hint 230,1,2
"Upon the outbreak of the second world war in 1939, who among the following leaders advocated for immediate mass Satyagraha?1.Gandhiji2.Subhas Chandra Bose3.Jawaharlal NehruSelect the correct answer using the code given below.",2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"1.Gandhiji and the dominant congress leadership felt that there did not exist in the country an atmosphere for an immediate struggle. Neither the masses were ready nor was the Congress organizationally in a position to launch a struggle. It was, therefore, necessary to carry on intense political work among the people, to prepare them for struggle.
2.Subhash Bose believed the masses were fully ready for action and were only waiting for a call from the leadership. He advocated for immediate mass Satyagraha. He even proposed a parallel congress to organise an immediate struggle if the congress leadership was not willing to go along with them.
3.Nehru considered the allied powers as imperialists. But in his opinion, an early struggle would have undermined the fight against Fascism. So he finally went along withGandhiji and the congress majority.",Hint 231,1,3
Which among the following leaders was/ were associated with Swarajya Party?1.C. R. Das2.Motilal Nehru3.Vithalbhai PatelSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.In December 1922,Chittaranjan Das,NarasimhaChintamanKelkar andMotilal Nehru formed the Congress-KhilafatSwarajaya Party with Das as the president and Nehru as one of the secretaries. Other prominent leaders includedHuseyn ShaheedSuhrawardy and Subhas Chandra Bose,Vithalbhai Patel and other Congress leaders who were becoming dissatisfied with the Congress.Vithalbhai Patel was the first Indian Speaker of Central Legislative Assembly from 1925 to 1930.
2.The Swarajists sought more representation in the Congress offices, and an end to the mandatory requirement for Congressmen to spin khadi cloth and do social service as a prerequisite for office.",Hint 232,1,1
"In the support of a particular Gandhian movement Subhash Chandra Bose resigned from the civil service and was later appointed as the principal of the National College in Calcutta.In the above passage, the movement refers to?",Non co-operation movement,Civil disobedience movement,Individual Satyagra,Quit India movement,1,"M.K. Gandhi issued a manifesto in March 1920, announcing his doctrine of non-violent Non-Cooperation Movement. He was the main force behind the movement and urged the people to adopt swadeshi principles and habits including hand spinning, weaving and work for removal of untouchability.Subhash Chandra Bose supported the movement and resigned from the civil service. He was appointed as the principal of the National College in Calcutta.Subhash Bose in Calcutta played a major role in uniting the Hindus and Muslims.",Hint 233,1,2
"With reference to the Mountbatten plan, consider the following statements:1.It provided Princely States the right either to join the Dominion of India or of Pakistan or remain independent.2.It proposed partition of the provinces of Punjab and Bengal based on referendum among the people.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,4,"1.Statement 1 is not correct. Since the Congress had conceded a unified India, their other points were to be met. Thus, independence for princely states was ruled out by the Mountbatten plan. The princely states would either join India or Pakistan.
2.Statement 2 is not correct. The Legislative Assemblies of Bengal and the Punjab (excluding the European members) were to meet each in two parts, one representing the Muslim majority districts and the other the rest of the provinces. The Muslim Majority districts were specified in the statement. Each part was to decide by a simple majority whether the province was to be partitioned or not. If either partyfavored, partition was to be effected accordingly. Referendum was to be held in the N.W.F. Province to decide whether that province would like to join Pakistan or India. The Legislative Assembly of Sind had to decide at a special meeting whether Sind as a whole should join the Constituent Assembly at Delhi or a new Constituent Assembly of areas which did not join it. The Muslim majority area of Sylhet in Assam had to decide by referendum whether the district in question would like to remain a part of Assam or join East Bengal which would constitute a part of Pakistan.",Hint 234,1,3
"Which among the following was/ were not the reasons behind Congress accepting the dominion status under Mountbatten Plan, 1947?",it would ensure peaceful and quick transfer of power.,it would allow for some more needed continuity in bureaucracy and army.,it was more important for the Congress to assume authority to keep a check on the situation of that time.,all the above statements were the reasons behind the Congress accepting dominion status.,4,"According to the Mountbatten Plan there would be complete transfer of power to the two new dominions India and Pakistan and the Governor General appointed by the British king on advice of the Cabinet of the concerned Dominion would govern till the new Constitutions were framed.
Though the nationalists deplored the partition of India; the All-India Congress Committee finally accepted the Mountbatten Plan for the following reasons:
1.The whole country was engulfed with large-scale communal riots over the partition of India. The Congress was convinced that the only solution to the communal problem lay in the partition of India into India and Pakistan.
2.The experience of working with the Muslim league had convinced the Congress that the League had joined the Interim Government to obstruct and not to cooperate and that having a joint administration with the League was not feasible.
3.The Congress also understood that the only alternative to partition was a Federation with a weak centre. A smaller India with a strong central authority was better than a bigger State with a weak Centre.
4.The Congress got ready for partition as it would lead to immediate independence from the British because any further continuation of British rule would mean a greater calamity for India as the British were instigating the rulers of the Indian States to remain independent.
5.The Congress leaders felt that further delay in the transfer of power could find India in the midst of a Civil War.
6.The leaders felt that partition would evolve India as a truly secular and democratic polity as it would get rid of the Constitution of separate electorates and other undemocratic procedures.",Hint 235,1,1
"With reference to Public Safety Bill, 1928, consider the following statements:1.It was proposed by the British government to acquire power to deport undesirable foreigners.2.It was defeated in the legislature with the help of Swarajists.3.It was supported by the capitalist class as it prevented foreign investors from investing in India.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.Statement 1 is correct: The British government was frightened by the spread of socialist and communist ideas. The Bill proposed to acquire the power to deport undesirable and subversive foreigners.
2.Statement 2 is correct: The Swarajists passed a series of adjournment motions and defeated the Government on the Public Safety Bill in 1928.
3.Statement 3 is not correct: The Bill was not supported by Indian capitalist class. Even the two spokesmen of the capitalist class,PurshottamdasThakurdas and G.D. Birla, firmly opposed the Bill.",Hint 236,1,2
Consider the following statements regarding Khan Abdul Gaffar Khan:1.He started Khudai Khidmatgars movement to wage an armed struggle against British rule in India.2.He started the political monthly Pukhtoon.3.He led the Khilafat agitation in Peshawar.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 and 2 only,2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.Statement 1 is not correct: Khan AbdulGaffar Khan known asBadshah Khan,â€œSarhadi Gandhi and Frontier Gandhi was a Pashtun leader and ardent follower ofMahtma Gandhi and was known for his non-violent opposition to British Rule. He started theKhudaiKhidmatgar movement (Servants of God).KhudaiKhidmatgar movement was a non-violent freedom struggle against the British Empire by the Pashtuns orPathans of the North-West Frontier Province led by Khan AbdulGhaffar Khan. TheKhudai
Khidmatgar was founded on abelief in the power ofGandhis notion of Satyagraha, The volunteers ofKhudaiKhidmatgar movement were also known asSurkho Poshor Redshirtsand it was initially a social reform organization focusing on education and the elimination of blood feuds from Afghan society but turned more political later.
2.Statement 2 is correct: He started the first Pushto political monthlyPukhtoon. It aimed at teaching thePakhtoons industry, economy andself reliance by inculcating in themself respect and fear of God that banished all other fears.
3.Statement 3 is not correct: He was the leader of Civil Disobedience movement in Peshawar. In April 1930, AbdulGhaffar Khan was arrested for organising the Civil Disobedience movement .",Hint 237,1,3
Which among the following is/are associated with the reforms undertaken in civil services during the 20th century?1.Montford Reforms2.Lee Commission3.Government of India Act of 1935Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Government of India Act 1919 was passed by British Parliament to further expand the participation of Indians in the Government of India. Since the act embodied reforms asrecommended by a report of Edwin Montagu {Secretary of State for India} and Lord Chelmsford
{Viceroy and Governor General}, it is also called as Montague-Chelmsford Reforms or simply Mont-Ford Reforms.
2.With regard to civil services reforms, the act provided for the establishment of a Public Service Commission in India for the first time. It recommended holding of simultaneous examination in India and England. It also recommended that 1/3rd of recruitments be made in India itself - to be raised annually by 1.5%.
3.Lee Commission (1923): Its main recommendations arei. Recommended political control over provincial civil services in the transferred field ofdyarchy. ii. All services were to be classified. iii. A public service commission was to be established for recruitment to central and quasi-judicial services. iv. Association of Indians was to be increased cadre-wise. v. Better pay package and service conditions were to be created.
4.The Government of India Act, 1935 recommended the establishment of a Federal Public Service Commission and Provincial Public Service Commission under their spheres . But the positions of control and authority remained in British hands and the process ofIndianisation of the civil servicedidnot put effective political power in Indian hands since the Indian bureaucrats acted as the agents of colonial rule.",Hint 238,1,1
Consider the following:1.Muslim league2.Communist Party of India3.Hindu MahasabhaWhich of the organizations given above supported the Quit India Movement?,1 only,2 and 3 only,2 only,None of the above,4,"1.The Quit India Movement was not supported by the Communists, Muslim League and the HinduMahasabha
2.The communists believed that it would virtually damage the labour movement . Labour Unions under Communist influence had apparently decided against participation in the movement, there were large-scale strikes in mills at Kanpur, Jamshedpur and Ahmadabad. When Russia joined the war on behalf of the Allies, the communists began to demand the withdrawal of the movement and pleaded all support to the government in its war effort.
3.The Muslim League considered the movement as the attempt of the Congress to turn out the British forcefully as a result of which Muslims would be enslaved by the Hindus. Even the depressed class leader Dr. B.R.Ambedkar described the movement as irresponsible and an act of madness.
4.HinduMahasabha (HM) was always suspicious of Indian National Congress (INC). They accused INC of being a pro-Muslim organization, and said they always keep Muslim interests ahead of Hindu interests. So it opposed the Quit India Movement primarily because it was launched by INC, an organization HinduMahasabha was hardly at good terms with. Especially in the 1930s, the HM distanced itself more from the INC because, in addition to being pro-Muslim, INC was also getting inclined towards communism and socialism.
5.Also, the threat of Japanese invasion was looming large. The Japanese were slowly capturing colonies in the South-East Asia, and the frightening stories of inhuman treatment they were subjecting on the people of those captured colonies were reaching India. HM knew that theBritishers are the only force that could save India from falling into the hands of a scarily fascist Japan. By taking a pro-British stance, HM also betrayedSubhash Chandra Boses INA.
6.VDSavarkar went on a nationwide tour encouraging Hindu youth to join army in large numbers. During the QIM, the British and the HM were allies.
7.Forming a government was also a chance for HinduMahasabha to deepen their roots in India. In 1939, whenBritishers declared Indias engagement inWWll without even consulting Indian people, INC ministries resigned in protest. Sensing an opportunity, both Muslim League and HinduMahasabha formed coalition governments. It was also seen as an opportunity to strengthen their mass base, and as a result, weaken INCs mass base.",Hint 239,1,2
The song Bande Mataram became widely popular for the first time during which of the following movements?,Swadeshi Movement,Non Cooperation Movement,Civil Disobedience Movement,Quit India Movement,1,"1.BandeMataram a poem known for sublimity of thought dedicated to the glory of mother nation was composed by late Shri.Bankim Chandra Chatterjee on November 07, 1876 at theKantalPada village of Bengal.
2.During the period of Swadeshi movement, BandeMataram became peoples song not only in Bengal but also the entire nation. Its soul- stirring words reverberated the streets, schools and every part and portion of India.",Hint 240,1,3
"With reference to the Civil Disobedience Movement in India, consider the following statements:1.It received massive support from Indian business class and women.2.It remained a peaceful movement throughout the country.3.It was successful in reducing government revenues and imports from Britain.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.Statement 1 is correct. A new feature of the CDM was a massive business support. They participated, at least during the initial period, in two very fruitful ways: they provided finance and supported the boycott movement, particularly that of foreign cloth. The other most important feature of the CDM was large-scalewomenâ€™s participation. At almost every stop during theDandi march, women flocked in thousands to hear Gandhi, and once the movement was launched, they were fully incorporated into it. They participated in the picketing of shops dealing in foreign cloth and liquor, and at places processions participated by one to two thousand women astonished the whole country and bewildered the authorities.
2.Statement 2 is not correct. It did not remain a purely peaceful movement. In Chittagong, Surya SenRevolt group carried out raid on two armouries and declared the establishment of a provisional government. In Sholapur, the people took to burning liquor shops and other symbols of government authority such as railway stations, police stations, municipal buildings, law courts etc.
3.Statement 3 is correct. It was successful in reducing government revenues and imports from Britain. imports of cloth from Britain had fallen by half; other imports like cigarettes had suffered a similar fate. Government income from liquor excise and land revenue had been affected.",Hint 241,1,1
Consider the following pairs: Mission of British Objective government1.August offer: Expansion of viceroys executive council2.Communal: Policy of separate awardelectorate3.Cripps mission: Grant of dominion statusWhich of the pairs given above is/are correctly matched?,1 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"August offer 1940:
To get Indian cooperation in the war effort, the viceroy announced the August Offer (August 1940) which proposed:
1.dominion status as the objective for India.
2.setting up of a constituent assembly after the war.
3.The number of the Indians in theViceroyâ€™s Executive council will be increased.
4.A war advisory Council would be set up.
Nehru said, Dominion status concept is dead as a door nail. Gandhi said that the declaration had widened the gulf between the nationalists and the British rulers.
Communal award 1932:
The Award allotted to each minority a number of seats in the legislatures to be elected on the basis of a separate electorate that is Muslims would be elected only by Muslims and Sikhs only by Sikhs, and so on. Muslims, Sikhs and Christians had already been treated as minorities. The Award declared the Depressed Classes also to be a minority community entitled to separate electorate and thus separated them from the rest of the Hindus. The Muslims were evidently satisfied with the Award.
Cripps mission 1942:
The main proposals of the mission were as follows.
5.An Indian Union with a dominion status would be set up.
6.After the end of the war, a constituent assembly would be convened to frame a new constitution. Members of this assembly would be partly elected by the provincial assemblies through proportional representation and partly nominated by the princes.
7.The British Government would accept the new constitution subject to two conditions: (i) any province not willing to join the Union could have a separate constitution and form a separate Union, and (ii) the new constitution making body and the British Government would negotiate a treaty to effect the transfer of power and to safeguard racial and religious minorities.",Hint 242,1,2
"The Indian capitalist class preferred constitutional form of struggle to mass civil disobedience because,1.The mass civil disobedience in a long run, could be a threat for capitalist class itself.2.Being at infant stage, Indian capitalist class was not so powerful to take up mass movement.3.Mass civil disobedience hampered their day to day business.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Statement 1 is correct. Mass civil disobedience, if it was prolonged, would unleash forces which could turn the movement revolutionary in a social sense and this could threaten capitalism itself.
2.Statement 2 is incorrect. Indian capitalist class was powerful enough to take up mass movement. In this context present statement is not correct, Indian capitalist class was taking constitutional form of agitation.
3.Statement 3 is correct. Continuing of mass civil disobedience was not good for the business, it hampers their day to day business activities.",Hint 243,1,3
"With reference to the provisions of the Cripps Mission, consider the following statements:1.It provided for a Dominion Status to India.2.Princely states were not to be represented in the Constituent Assembly.3.Provincial Assemblies were to elect their representatives to the Constituent Assembly.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,1 only,2,"1.Even though Cripps announced that the aim of British policy in India was â€˜the earliest possible realization of self- government inIndia,the Draft Declaration he brought with him was disappointing. The Declaration promised India Dominion Status. (statement 1 is correct)
2.It provided for a constitution-making body after the War whose members would be elected by the provincial assemblies and nominated by the rulers in case of the princely states. (statement 2 is not correct, statement 3 is correct).
3.The Pakistan demand was accommodated by the provision that any province which was not prepared to accept the new constitution would have the right to sign a separate agreement with Britain regarding its future status.",Hint 244,1,1
"With reference to the establishment of FICCI during late 1920s by the Indian Capitalists, consider the following statements:1.FICCIs role was limited to fighting for economic demands of the capitalists.2.It participated in the first round table conference to put forward the capitalist class interests in Britain.3.It was recognized by the Britishers and the public as representative of Indian business interest from all over the country.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?","1, 2 and 3",2 and 3 only,3 only,1 and 2 only,3,"1.Since the early 1920s, efforts were being made by various capitalists like G.D. Birla andPurshottamdasThakurdas to establish a national level organization of Indian commercial, industrial and financial interests (as opposed to the already relatively more organized European interests in India) to be able to effectively lobby with the colonial government. This effort culminated in the formation of the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) in 1927, with a large and rapidly increasing representation from all parts of India. The FICCI was soon recognized by the British government as well as the Indian public in general, as representing the dominant opinion as well as the overall consensus within the Indian capitalist class. ( Statement 3 is correct)
2.The leaders of the capitalist class also clearly saw the role of the FICCI as being that ofnational guardians of trade, commerce andindustry,performing in the economic sphere in colonial India the functions of a national government. The FICCI was, however, not to remain merely a sort of trade union organization of the capitalist class fighting for its own economic demands and those of the
nation. The leaders of the capitalist class now clearly saw the necessity of, and felt strong enough for, the class to effectively intervene in politics. As SirPurshottamdas, President of FICCI, declared at its second annual session in 1928: We can no more separate our politics from our economics. Further involvement of the class in politics meant doing so on the side of Indian nationalism. Indian commerce and industry are intimately associated with and are, indeed, an integral part of the national movement - growing with its growth and strengthening with its strength. ( Statement 1 is not correct).
3.FICCI did not participate in the first round table conference because in their opinion unless the Round Table Conference was attended by Mahatma Gandhi. ( Statement 2 is not correct)",Hint 245,1,2
Who among the following never presided any of the sessions of Indian National Congress?1.Sarojini Naidu2.Mahatma Gandhi3.Lala Lajpat RaiSelect the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,3 only,All the above leaders presided the Congress sessions. ,3,"1.LalaLajpat Rai never presided any of the Congress session.
2.Sarojini Naidu was the first Indian woman President to chair the Indian National Congress at Kanpur Session of 1925. She played a leading role in the Civil Disobedience Movement and was sent to jail along with Gandhi and other leaders.
3.The Indian National Congress held its thirty-ninth session at Belgaum on the 26th & 27th Dec. 1924.Gandhiji was the president of the Congress only on one occasion and the session was held in Belgaum.",Hint 246,1,3
"With reference to the Simon Commission, consider the following statements:1.It recommended the replacement of dyarchy with responsible government in the provinces.2.It was boycotted by all political parties in India.3.Rabindranath Tagore renounced his knighthood to protest against Simon commission.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1,"Statement 1 is correct. The Government of India Act 1919 had introduced the system of diarchy to govern the provinces of British India. However, the Indian public clamoured for revision of the difficult diarchy form of government, and the Government of India Act 1919 itself stated that a commission would be appointed after 10 years to investigate the progress of the governance scheme and suggest new steps for reform. The Indian Statutory Commission was a group of seven British Members of Parliament they had been dispatched to India in 1927 to study constitutional reform in that colony. It was commonly referred to as the Simon Commission after its chairman, Sir John Simon. Simon Commission recommended the replacement of diarchy with responsible government in the provinces, which was done in 1935.
Provisions of the Commission:
1.There should be a constitutional reconstruction.
2.It would be a federal constitution.
3.The provinces should be given full autonomy including law.
4.The governor should have discretionary power to relate to internal security and administrative powers to protect the different communities.
5.The number of members of provincial legislative council should be increased.
6.Governor-general should have complete power to appoint the members of the cabinet.
7.The government of India should have complete control over the high court.
Statement 2 is not correct. At the annual session of the Congress in Madras in December 1927, a resolution was passed which advocated the boycott of the Simon Commissionatevery stage and in every form. Other factions of the politicians also joined the suit. However, in Muslim league, there was a split of thought. Jinnah was for boycotting the commission; but MuhammadShafi was for support for the Government. Liberals of the HinduMahasabha also supported the boycott.Justics Party in Madras and the Unionists in Punjab decided not to boycott the Commission.
Statement 3 is not correct: Rabindranath TagoreTagore renounced his Knighthood in protest forJalianwallaBagh mass killing.",Hint 247,1,1
"Indian Political leaders succeeded in reaching an agreement with the British government, according to which the idea of separate electorates for the Depressed Classes was abandoned, however the seats reserved for them in the provincial legislatures and the Central Legislature were increased.The agreement discussed in the above line is:",Gandhi - Irwin Pact ,Poona Pact,Congress - League Pact,Desai - Liaqat Pact,2,"1.Poona Pact: In order to save the life of Gandhi who was on relentless fast post communal award of Ramsay McDonald, political leaders Madan MohanMalviya, M.C. Rajah and B.R.Ambedkar got together and succeeded in hammering out an agreement, known as the Poona Pact, according to which the idea of separate electorates for the Depressed Classes was abandoned but the seats reserved for them in the provincial legislatures were increased from seventy-one in the Award to 147 and in the Central Legislature to eighteen per cent of the total.
2.By the end of 1930(post first Round Table Conference), the British had realized that without conciliating the Congress, no political settlement was possible.
3.Gandhi-Irwin Pact:Gandhiji negotiated with the Viceroy Lord Irwin in Delhi. And finally an agreement was signed on 5 March 1931, popularly known as the Gandhi-Irwin Pact or Delhi Pact.
4.Lucknow pact of 1916 also known Congress-League Pact was to reunite Congress was after the Surat split of 1907,and it brought about an agreement between the Congress and the League.",Hint 248,1,2
"With reference to Jallianwallah Bagh massacre, consider the following statements:1.The public meeting was held to protest the the arrest of Saifuddin Kitchlew and Satyapal.2.The British public protested against the atrocities done by General Dyer.3.The priests of Golden Temple honored General Dyer and declared him to be a Sikh.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Statement 1 is correct. On Baisakhi day, a large, crowd of people mostly from neighbouring villages, unaware of theprohibitory orders in the city, had gathered in the small park ofJallianwalabagh to protest against the arrest of their leaders,SaifuddinKitchlew andSatyapal.
2.Statement 2 is not correct. The House of Lords of the British Parliament endorsed General Dyers action and the British public showed solidarity with General Dyer by helping The Morning Post collect 30,000 pounds for him.
3.Statement 3 is correct. The priests of Golden Temple at Amritsar honoured General Dyer, responsible for theJallianwallaBagh massacre, with asaropa (robe ofhonor) and declared him to be a Sikh.",Hint 249,1,3
Which of the following were the immediate reasons behind the launching of Quit India movement?1.Failure of round table conferences.2.Rising prices and war time shortages .3.Reverses suffered by British in South East Asia.Select the correct answer using the code given below:,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"1.Statement 1 is incorrect, failure ofcripps mission led to popular discontent of leaders of nationaliststruggle.infact the round table conferences held before civil disobedience movement.
2.Statement 2 is correct. Due to world war-II, there were food shortages and crisis in the form of price hike as resources were devoted for war.
3.Statement 3 is correct. British evacuation from Malaya and Burma exposed the myth of white superiorityinfront ofjapanesseagression.",Hint 250,1,1
"With reference to Congress Socialist Party, consider the following statements:1.It was founded by Jawahar Lal Nehru and Subash Chandra Bose.2.It  emerged  as  a  rival  political organisation to Indian National Congress.3.It offered conditional help for the British war efforts during Second world war. Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,3 only,None,4,"1.Statement 1 is not correct: It was formed with Acharya Narendra Deva as President and Jay Prakash Narayan as General Secretary in 1934.
2.Statement 2 is not correct: The Congress Socialist Party was not a rival political organisation to the Congress but was launched to work within the Congress, to strengthen it, mould and shape its policies. Its constitution defined that the members were all required to be members of the Indian National Congress.
3.Statement 3 is not correct: It disagreed with the Congress offer of conditional help for British war efforts as it maintained that the war was a conflict between partners of imperialism for repartition of the world.",Hint 251,1,2
"It declared a deadline of June 30, 1948 for the transfer of power with lapse of obligation of British government on princely states, in essence it was a reversion of the Cripps Offer.The above line describes which of the following?",Mountbatten Plan,Attlees Declaration,Plan Balkan,Cabinet mission,2,"Attlees Announcement:
On 20 February 1947, the British Prime Minister Clement Attlee made an important announcement. The main points outlined in the statement were
1.A deadline of 30 June 1948 was fixed for the transfer of power to Indians
2.A partition of the country which the Cabinet Mission had completely rejected and as proposed by Cripps mission
3.Mountbatten was to replace Wavell as the Viceroy.
Plan Balkan - This plan envisaged the transfer of power to separate provinces (or to a confederation, if formed before the transfer), with Punjab and Bengal given the option to vote for partition of their provinces. The various units thus formed along with the princely states (rendered independent by lapse of paramountcy) would have the option of joining India or Pakistan or remaining separate. The plan was quickly abandoned after Nehru reacted violently to it.",Hint 252,1,3
Which of the following activities was/ were carried out under Constructive Work by No-changers?1.Hindu Muslim Unity.2.Removing untouchability.3.Setting up of National schools and colleges.Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"Constructive Work by No-Changers involved:
1.Ashrams sprang up where young, men and women worked, amongtribals and lower castes (especially inKheda andBardoli areas of Gujarat), and popularised charkha and khadi.
2.National schools and colleges were set up where students were trained in a non-colonial ideological framework.
3.Significant work was done for Hindu-Muslim unity, removing untouchability, boycott of foreign cloth and liquor, and for flood relief.
4.The constructive workers served as the backbone of civil disobedience as active organisers",Hint 253,1,1
"During his time the Communal Award was announced through which separate communal electorates were set up which led to ending the fast unto death by Gandhiji in Yeravada jail. Also during his tenure, the All India Kisan Sabha and Congress Socialist Party were founded as the socialist trend and the peasant demands reached their highest peak.In the above given passage his refers to which of the following Viceroys?",Lord Irwin,Lord Linlithgow,Lord Willingdon,Lord Reading,3,"Lord Willingdon served as a Viceroy and Governor General of India from 1931 to 1936.
1.The important events of this period include Second and Third Round Table Conferences, relaunching of Civil Disobedience Movement, Communal Award by Ramsay MacDonald (1932), Poona Pact (1932), Government of India Act 1935, and Separation of Burma from India.
2.The All IndiaKisan Sabha (AIKS), also known as theAkhilBharatiyaKisan Sabha and All India Peasants Union, was an Indian political association of the peasants front of the former undivided Communist Party of India (CPI). The All IndiaKisan Sabha was one of the Indian Organisations during Freedom Struggle and peasant movement that was founded by SwamiSahajanandSaraswati in the year 1936.
3.The Congress Socialist Party was founded by radical and young Congressmen who during their long terms of imprisonment in the Civil Disobedience Movement came into contact with Marxist ideas. They had their reservation about Gandhis constructive programme. In April 1934, at Banaras,Sampurnananda published a pamphlet in which he stressed the need for the formation of an All India Socialist Party as a wing of theCongress.The Congress Socialists belonged to the westernized middle class. They were influenced by the ideas of Marx, Gandhi and the Social Democracy of the West. They practised Marxian Socialism, Congress Nationalism and liberal democracy of the West.",Hint 254,1,2
"Which among the following is not correct with respect to the Cabinet Mission plan, 1945?",It suggested the setting up of an interim government.,It rejected the demand of Pakistan and recommended union of India.,It recommended formation of constituent assembly elected by the provincial legislative assemblies.,Indian National Congress rejected the plan with objections to the provisions of grouping of states.,4,"1.On 19 February, 1945 the Secretary of State, LordPethick Lawrence, announced that a three member Cabinet Mission consisting of himself, Sir Stafford Cripps , and A.V. Alexander would be sent to negotiate with the Indian leaders the terms for the transfer of power to Indians. The Mission failed to reach an agreement with the Indian leaders. As the Congress and the Muslim League could not reach an agreement, the Mission announced its own plan on 16 May 1946.
2.Main Recommendations: (i) Rejection of Demand for Pakistan, in turn, it recommended,Union ofIndiawith the Provinces with an option to join/come out of groups. (ii) It recommended a Constituent Assembly that was to be elected by the Provincial Legislative Assemblies (iii) It suggested the setting up of an Interim Government.
3.The Congress accepted the plan on 24 June 1946 though it objected to the provisions of grouping. The Muslim League initially rejected it as its demands for a sovereign state of Pakistan was rejected and did not join the Constituent Assembly; but it joined the Interim Government. The HinduMahasabha objected
to the compulsory grouping of states. CPI objected to the composition and powers of the Constituent Assembly.",Hint 255,1,3
"With reference  to Kheda satyagraha, consider the following statements:1.Mahatama Gandhi was appointed as a member of the government committe formed to resolve grievances of peasants.2.Vallabhbhai Patel and Indulal Yagnik participated in the movement.3.Gujarat Sabha was founded by Mahatama Gandhi to organize peasants in Kheda.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 and 2 only,2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"1.Statement 1 is not correct: It was inChamparan satyagraha whereMahatama Gandhi was nominated as a member of the government appointedcommitte (ChamparanAgragarian committee) to look into the matter.
2.Statement 2 iscorrect:TheKheda peasant struggle is also known as no-tax peasant struggle. It was a satyagraha launched in March 1919 under the leadership ofGandhiji,SardarVallabhbhai Patel,IndulalYajnik, N.M. Joshi,ShankerlalPareekh and several others. The peasants ofKheda signed a petition in leadership ofSardar Patel and called for tax to be scrapped.
3.Statement 3 is not correct: Gujarat Sabha was not founded byMahatama Gandhi. It was established in 1884 at Ahmedabad, Gujarat. Most of its membership were Gujarati lawyers and civic leaders, including men likeVallabhbhai Patel,Narhari Parikh, Ravi Shankar Vyas andMohanlal Pandya, who would become famous freedom fighters and political leaders. Indian leader Mohandas Gandhi served as its president from 1918 to 1919. The Sabha would play a pivotal role in organizing the peasant rebellion inKheda in 1918-19. It merged into the Indian National Congress in 1920 - becoming the Gujarat Pradesh Congress Committee.",Hint 256,1,1
Which of the following statements with respect to Tripuri session of congress 1939 is correct?,Mahatma Gandhi advocated giving the British Government a six-month ultimatum to grant independence.,In this session agrarian programme was adopted by the Indian national congress.,Forward bloc was formed by Subhash Chandra Bose as the result of differences in this session.,It equivocally condemned the Nazi attack on Poland as well as Nazism and Fascism.,3,"1.Option (c) is the correct answer.
2.Tripuri session of congress 1939: It was held in Tripuri, a small village in the District Jabalpur of Madhya Pradesh (Central Province), presided bySubhash Chandra Bose.
3.The internal strife in the Congress reached the climax at the Tripuri session. Bose in his presidential address at Tripuri advocated programme of immediately giving the British Government a six-month ultimatum to grant the national demand for independence and of launching a mass civil disobedience movement if it failed to do so. Gandhi too believed that another round for massstruggle was necessary to win freedom but said the time was not yet ripe for an ultimatum because neither the Congress nor the masses were yet ready for struggle. This internal strife forced Bose to resign from thepresidentship andRajendra Prasad was elected in his place.
Subsequently, in May, Bose and his followers formed the Forward Bloc as a new party within the Congress and when on 9 July he gave a call for an all-India protest against an AICC resolution, the Working Committee took disciplinary action against him, removing him from thepresidentship of the Bengal Provincial Congress Committee and debarring him from holding any Congress office for three years.
4.Akisan manifesto was issued by theKisan Congress and the influence of this manifesto was seen in the agrarian programme adopted by the Indian National Congress at itsFaizpur session in Maharashtra in December 1936. The second session of theKisan Congress presided over by N.G.Ranga was held along with the Indian National Congress session atFaizpur. TheFaizpur Agrarian Programme reiterated the demand made at Karachi for substantial reduction in both rent andrevenue.Hence option (b) is incorrect.
5.The official Congress unequivocally condemned the Nazi attack on Poland as well as Nazism and Fascism, and declared that India could not be party to a war which was ostensibly being fought for democratic freedom while that freedom was being denied to her and adopted a resolution at a meeting of the Congress Working Committee held atWardha. Hence option (d) is incorrect.",Hint 257,1,2
Which of the following factors contributed tothe rise of communalism during the British period?1.Swadeshi Movement2. Morley-Minto Reforms3. Lucknow Pact of 1916Select the correct answer using the code given below.,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.Statement 1 is correct. During the swadeshi movement, a section of Muslims supported the partition scheme from the very beginning. The Government was very eager to enlist the support of the Muslims against the Hindus. This policy was initiated by Lord Curzon when the visited East Bengal in 1904. He inducedNawabSalimulla of Dacca to declare himself in favour of the Partition.
2.NawabSalimulla became the leader of the Muhammadan opposition to the anti-partition and Swadeshi movement. Inflammatory anti- Hindu pamphlets were distributed patronized by the government officials that resulted in the outbreak of many communal riots, the most serious of which were those atComilla andJamalpur
3.Statement 2 is correct. Under Morley-Minto reforms, Muslim voters (and later Sikhs and others) were put in separate constituencies from which only Muslims could stand as candidates and for which only Muslims could vote. Separate electorates turned elections and legislative councils into arenas for communal conflicts. Since the voters were exclusively the followers of one religion, the candidates did not have to appeal to voters belonging to other religions. They could, therefore, make blatantly communal appeals.
4.Statement 3 is correct. The Lucknow Pact contributed to the rise of communalism in India owing to the following provisions:
The weightage to Muslim minority was recognized, the result was that this left the way open to the future resurgence of communalism in Indian politics.
Muslim members strength in legislature was laid down province by province, thus one of the most dangerous pacifist policies of congress not only recognized communal representation but also recognized communal privileges.
Any legislature could not work if 3/4th member of any religion opposed it, its consequence was introduction of communal veto in legislature.",Hint 258,1,3
Whichamong thefollowing leadersled marchesto protestagainst British salttax during Civil Disobedience movement?1.C. Rajgopalachari2.K. Kelappan3.Sarojini NaiduSelect the correctanswerusing the code given below.,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,2 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"1.TheVedaranyam March orVedaranyam Satyagraha was organised to protest the salt tax imposed by the British Raj in India. The march took place in April 1930. The march was led by C. Rajagopalachari.
2.Payyanur Salt Satyagraha: On April 21, 1930, the volunteers under the leadership of K.Kelappan, the Kerala Gandhi, collected salty sand with coconut shells in gunny bags and distilled it and sold small packets in the evening.
3.Dharsana Salt Satyagraha: On May 21, 1930,Sarojini Naidu, Imam Sahib andManilal led a raid onDharsana Salt works to protest againstbritish salt tax.</span",Hint 259,1,1
Why 15th August was chosen as the Independence Date of India?,It was on this date that Indian Independence Bill was introduced in the British House of Commons and passed.,Lord Mountbatten chose the date as he considered this date to be lucky.,It was on this date that the Lahore Session of the Congress passed the Purna Swaraj resolution.,"On this date, Indias Constituent Assembly passed the Objectives Resolution granting freedom to India. ",2,"Justification & Learning: Option A: Indian Independence Bill was introduced in the British House of Commons on July 4, 1947 and passed within a fortnight.
Option B: The date was chosen by Lord Mountbatten himself because he had considered this date to be lucky. It was on this day during the World War II, that the Japanese Army surrendered to the allies.
Option C: In 1929, when Jawaharlal Nehru as Congress President gave the call for Poorna Swaraj or total independence from British colonial rule, January 26 was chosen as the Independence Day. Later it was declared as the Republic Day.",Hint 260,1,2
Which of the following Satyagraha/ movement was referred as Himalayan Blunder by Mahatma Gandhi?,Rowlatt Act Satyagraha,Non-Cooperation Movement,Civil Disobedience Movement,Quit India Movement,1,"During the movement against theRowlatt Act, Punjab was the most sensitive area. The Lieutenant Governor of Punjab Sir Michael O Dyer had been most repressive towards the revolutionary activities and even called in the army for the same purpose. He ordered for the arrest and deportation of Dr.Satyapal andKitchlew, the two prominent leaders of Punjab. It infuriated the people and they organised protest movement. The atmosphere was more aggravated due to the police firing on the peaceful precisionists and a retaliatory attack of the people on Europeans.
On April 13, 1919, General Dyer ordered open fire on innocent people atJallianwalaBagh where hundreds of people were massacred and thousands of other were wounded. On April 18, 1919 Mahatma Gandhi withdrew the movement and called it a Himalayan blunder.",Hint 261,1,3
Which of the following statement is correct regarding the Chamber of Princes established in 1920?1.It was popularly known as Narender Mandal or Narendra Mandal.2.The needs and aspiration of princely states were voiced using this forum.3.It survived until the end of the British Raj in 1947.Select the correct answer using the codes given below:,1 and 3 only,2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"All the given statements are correct.
The Chamber of Princes (Narender Mandal or Narendra Mandal) was an institution established in 1920 by a royal proclamation of King- Emperor George V to provide a forum in which the rulers of the princely states of India could voice their needs and aspirations to the colonial government of British India. It survived until the end of the British Raj in 1947.",Hint 262,1,1
Which among the following can be attributed to the absence of revolutionary activities during the Non-Cooperation movement?1.Mahatma Gandhi and C.R. Das pleaded the revolutionaries to suspend their activities.2.The revolutionaries enthusiastically participated in the Non-Cooperation movement.3.There was a brutal repression on the revolutionaries during the Non-Cooperation movement.Select the correct answer using the codes given below.,1 and 3 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"Statement 1 is correct. Under the persuasion of Gandhi and C.R. Das, many revolutionary groups either agreed to join the non- cooperation programme or suspended their activities to give the nonviolent Non-Cooperation Movement a chance.
Statement 2 is correct. Nearly all major leaders of revolutionary policies had been enthusiastic participants in the Non-Cooperation Movement and includedJogesh Chandra Chatterjee, Surya Sen,Bhagat Singh,Sukhdev, Chandrasekhar Azad, ShivVerma,Bhagwaticharan Vohra,JaidevKapur andJatin Das. Two separate strands of revolutionary terrorist groups emerged during this period—one operating in Punjab-UP-Bihar and the other in Bengal.
Statement 3 is incorrect. The revolutionaries had faced severe repression during the First World War. But in early 1920, many were released by the Government under a general amnesty to create a harmonious environment for theMontford Reforms to work. Soon, Gandhi launched the Non-Cooperation Movement.",Hint 263,1,2
Consider the following statements:1.The issue of untouchability assumed a truly national dimension after Gandhi offered unqualified support to the Vykom Satyagraha.2.The Resolution on Fundamental Rights adopted by the Congress at its Karachi session had contained the right to equality.3.The weekly Harijan founded by Mahatma Gandhi was not able to reach to masses as it was published in English only.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,2 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"Statement 1 is correct. The issue of untouchability assumed a truly national dimension after Gandhi offered unqualified support to theVykom Satyagraha launched by some local leaders of Travancore in modern day Kerala, who were trying to remove the ban on the entry of untouchables on the roads surrounding theVykom temples.
Also, in order to give theVaikom Satyagraha a national and cosmopolitan look to gain the attention of the entire world, it was necessary for theVaikom Satyagrahis to include their fight as an activity of the Indian National Congress, and get Mahatma Gandhi to approve it.
Through his newspaper Young India, Gandhi informed the country about the sufferings of the satyagrahis and, soon after that, the cause was taken up by the national press.
Statement 2 is correct. By endorsing the Delhi Pact at the Congresss Karachi session, two resolutions were adopted—one on Fundamental Rights and the other on National Economic Programme. The resolutions on Fundamental Rights contained the equal legal rights irrespective of caste, creed and sex.
Statement 3 is incorrect. The weeklyHarijan founded by Mahatma Gandhi was a multi-lingual newspaper.Harijans had bothGujrati andhindi edition.",Hint 264,1,3
"Dr. Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar played a pivotal role in the Dalit movement in India. Regarding this, which of the following parties were established by Dr. Ambedkar to address the Dalit cause?1.Bahishkrit Hitakarini Sabha2.Independent Labour Party (ILP)3.Peasants and Workers Party of IndiaSelect the correct answer using the codes given below:",1 and 3 only,3 only,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 3",3,"The Peasants and Workers Party of India was founded in 1947. The party was founded in Maharashtra byTulsidasJadhav, KeshavraoJedhe and others.
In 1924,BahishkritHitakarini Sabha was formed by Dr.Ambedkar for removing difficulties of the untouchables and placing their grievances before government. This was his first organization to achieve his political and social ideals.
Ambedkar formed the Independent Labour Party (ILP) in August, 1936, which participated in the provincial elections of Bombay and won 13 seats out of 15 seats reserved for scheduled castes. Independent Labour Party was transformed byAmbedkar as the All India Scheduled CastesFederation in 1942. It was a political party which participated in the general elections of 1946 but was completely defeated.",Hint 265,1,1
Consider the following statements:1.Madam Bhikaji Cama began the journal Inquilab to spread her revolutionary thought.2.Aruna Asaf Ali unfurled the National Flag in Bombay to signify the commencement of the Quit India Movement.3.Durgabai Deshmukh founded the Andhra Mahilasabha for welfare of women.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,1 only,"1, 2 and 3",1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,4,"Statement 1 is incorrect. The Inquilab was a monthly journal of Congress.ArunaAsaf Ali was the Editor of this journal.
Statement 2 is correct.ArunaAsaf Ali participated in public processions during the Salt Satyagraha. She was arrested on the charge that she was a vagrant and hence not released in 1931 under the Gandhi-Irwin Pact which stipulated release of all political prisoners. On 8 August 1942, the All India Congress Committee passed the Quit India resolution at the Bombay session. The government responded by arresting the major leaders and all members of the Congress Working Committee and thus tried to pre-empt the movement fromsuccess.YoungArunaAsaf Ali presided over the remainder of the session on 9 August and hoisted the Congress flag at theGowalia Tankmaidan.
Statement 3 is correct.DurgabaiDeshmukh was a believer of Womens Empowerment and founded AndhraMahila Sabha to meet social, cultural and educational needs of women. She was a freedom fighter and disciple ofGandhiji.",Hint 266,1,2
"The interim government headed by Jawaharlal Nehru in 1946 was of great significance, because:1.The Objective Resolution was passed by this government.2.Both the Congress and the Muslim League came into an agreement on the partition of the country.3.Muslim League gave up the Direct-Action Plan before joining this government.Select the correct answer using the codes given below:","1, 2 and 3",3 only,1 only,1 and 2 only,3,"Statement 1 is correct.
On 2nd September 1946, the Interim Government of India was formed. This temporary government was formed from the Constituent Assembly of India (which was then newly elected). This government was led by Jawaharlal Nehru. The Constituent Assembly had its first meeting on December 9, 1946. It passed the Objectives Resolution drafted by J. L. Nehru stating the ideals of an independent sovereign republic with autonomous units, adequate minority safeguards and social, political and economic democracy.
This Resolution was unanimously adopted by the Assembly on January 22, 1947. It influenced the eventual shaping of the constitution through all its subsequent stages. Its modified version forms the Preamble of the present Constitution.",Hint 267,1,3
Consider the following events during Indias Freedom struggle:1.Jinnahs 14 Points2.First Round Table Conference.3.Nehru Report.4.Gandhi-Irwin PactWhich one of the following is the correct chronological order of the event above?,"1, 3, 2, 4","3, 1, 4, 2","3, 1, 2, 4","1, 2, 4, 3",3,"1.Nehru Report – August 1928. 2.Jinnahs 14 Points- March 1929
3.First Round Table Conference- November 1930 to January 1931 4.Gandhi-Irwin Pact- February 1931",Hint 268,1,1
"RegardingtheNon-Cooperation Movement, consider the following statements1.It advocated popularizing of swadeshi goods and khadi.2.It boycotted the elections held under the provisions of the 1919 Act.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"Statement 1 is correct. The boycott of foreign cloth and use of khadi instead was one of the important programme of the Non- Cooperation Movement.
Statement 2 is correct. At a special session in Calcutta, the Congress approved thenoncooperation programme till the Punjab andKhilafat wrongs were removed andswaraj was established. The resolution included the boycott of Legislative Councils. Although, there were some differences over this as some leaders like C.R. Das were not willing to include a boycott of councils, but bowed to.Congress discipline; these leaders boycotted elections held in November 1920 and the majority of the voters too stayed away.",Hint 269,1,2
"Regarding the Gandhi-Irwin Pact, all the below statements are correct except,",The government granted right to make salt in coastal villages for personal consumption and sale in local markets.,The government returned all lands which were not sold to thirds parties.,All political prisoners not convicted of violence were released immediately.,Gandhi agreed to participate in the second-round table conference.,1,Statement (a) is incorrect. Through the Gandhi-Irwin Pact the government granted right to make salt in coastal villages for personal consumption not for sale.,Hint 270,1,3
The proposal to create Pakistan was rejected by the Cabinet mission. Which of the following were the reason(s) for it?1.It would encourage Sikhs to demand separate statehood.2.The proposed Pakistan had many Non-Muslim populations.3.Regional ties of Bengal and Punjab would be disturbed.4.Partition would result economic and administrative problems.Select the correct answer using the codes given below:,"1, 2, 3 and 4","1, 3 and 4 only",2 and 3 only,"2, 3 and 4 only",1,"Statement 1 is correct. Some Sikh leaders were demanding a separate state if the country was partitioned. The principle of communal self – determination would claim separation of Hindu majority Western Bengal and Sikh and Hindu dominated Ambala andJullunder divisions of Punjab.
Statement 2 is correct. The Pakistan so formed would include a large non-Muslim population; 38% in the North West and 48% in the North East.
Statement 3 is correct. The deep-seated regional ties would be disturbed if Bengal and Punjab were partitioned.
Statement 4 is correct. Considering the vastness of the country and scattered economic resources and infrastructures, there was an obvious implication of economic and administrative problems might occur due to the partition.",Hint 271,1,1
What were the reasons for starting the Quit India Movement?1.Failure of the August offer.2.Rising prices of commodities.3.Japanese aggression.Select the correct answer using the codes given below:,3 only,2 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",1 and 2 only,2,"Statement 1 is incorrect. It was the failure of the Cripps Mission not the August offer which was responsible for starting the Quit India Movement. The Cripps Mission proposals failed to satisfy Indian nationalists and meet the constitutional deadlock. Thus, it exposed Britains unchanged attitude. Mahatma Gandhi said that Cripps offer of Dominion Status after the war was a post-dated cheque drawn on a crashing bank.
Statement 2 is correct. There was a popular discontent due to the rising prices and shortage of food items like rice, salt etc.
Statement 3 is correct. In the Second World War the Japanese were triumphing and they had already overrun Singapore and Malaya. They were nearly reaching Burma and India. So it was thought that Presence of British in India was an invitation to Japan to invade.",Hint 272,1,2
Which of the following provision(s) was/were a part of the June 3rd plan?1.A boundary commission was to be set up.2.Princely states were made free to join either India or Pakistan.3.A referendum was to be conducted in the Sylhet region of Assam.Select the correct answer using the codes given below:,2 only,1 and 2 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 2 and 3",4,"Statement 1 is correct. Mountbatten planned recommended to setting up of a boundary commission if partition was to be effected.
Statement 2 is correct. The Mountbatten plan ruled out independence for the princely states and they were provided the option either to join India or Pakistan.
Statement 3 is correct. The Mountbatten plan recommended Referendum in North West Frontier Province and Sylhet district of Bengal would decide the fate of these areas.",Hint 273,1,3
What was the main purpose behind the formation of the National Social Conference during the freedom struggle?,The Indian National Congress did not want to include social reforms in its deliberations and decided to form a separate body for this purpose.,M. G. Ranade and GhanshyamDas Birla formed the National Social Conference to bring together all the social reform groups in the country.,The National Social Conference aimed to spread socialism as an ideology in India.,The National Social Conference worked as a social reform cell of the Indian National Congress and its aim was to focus attention on social reform.,4,"Indian (National) Social Conference was founded by M.G.Ranade and Raghunath Rao. It was virtually the social reform cell of the Indian National Congress. Its first session was held in Madras in December 1887. The Conference met annually as a subsidiary convention of the Indian National Congress, at the same venue, and focused attention on social reform",Hint 274,1,1
The Congress ministers resigned in the seven provinces in 1939 because,The Congress could not form government in the remaining provinces.,There were widespread communal disturbances in the provinces,To protest the governments declaration about Indias participation in the second world war without consulting Indian people.,"Emergence of Leftist groups like Forward Bloc, Congress Socialist Party, Communist Party threatened the Congress",3,"Option (c) is correct.
On September 8, 1939, there was a meeting of the Congress Working Committee. In this meeting, it was suggested that the issue of the war and peace with India must be decided by the Indian People. But on this resolution, Government did not do anything. So the Congress High Command declared that Congress Ministries in the provinces should resign. This irked the British Government.
Knowledge Base
The Muslim league had openly supported the British in the war policies.",Hint 275,1,2
"Regarding Rajagopalachari formula, consider the following statements1.The main objective of the Rajagopalachari formula was to solve the constitutional crisis that occurred due to the failure of the Cripps Mission.2.The proposals of the Rajagopalachari formula were shadowed by the two-nation theory of Muslim League.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,Option c is correct.Chakravarthi Rajagopalacharis formula was a proposal formulated byChakravarthi Rajagopalachari to solve the political deadlock between the All India Muslim League and Indian National Congress on independence of India from the British. The Leagues position was that the Muslims and Hindus of British India were of two separate nations and hence the Muslims had the right to their own nation when India obtained independence.,Hint 276,1,3
Which of the following pair(s) is/are correctly matched?1.Peel commission – Federal structure2.Butler commission – Indian states3.Sir Andrew Frazer – Police reform4.Hilton Young Commission – CurrencySelect the correct answer using the codes given below.,1 and 4 only,"1, 2 and 3 only","2, 3 and 4 only","1, 2, 3 and 4 only",4,"1) Butler commission: The Indian states committee appointed a committee under the Chairmanship of Sir Harcourt Butler which was popularly known as the Butler Committee to investigate and clarify the relationship between the paramount power and the Princes of Princely States in AD 1927.
2) Sir Andrew Frazer commission: In 1902, appointed a Police Commission under Sir Andrew Frazer to enquire into the police administration of every province.
3) Hilton Young Commission: It was a Commission of Inquiry appointed in 1927 to look into the possible closer union of the British territories in East and Central Africa.
4) Peel commission: In 1916, this commission was set up for federal structure of India.",Hint 277,1,1
Which among the following provides an edge to the Civil Disobedience Movement (CDM) over the Non-cooperation Movement?1.Participation of Muslims2.Absence of communal clashes3.Participation of laborers4.Responses from the business groupsSelect the correct answer using the codes given below.,"1, 2, 3 and 4",1 and 3 only,2 and 4 only,2 and 3 only,3,"Statement 1 is incorrect. The participation of Muslims in the Civil Disobedience Movement was nowhere near to the Non-cooperation Movement level. As the objectives of the Non-Cooperation Movement and theKhilafat movement were clubbed together, the movementwas able to bring the urban Muslims into the national movement.
Statement 2 is correct. Non-Cooperation Movement (NCM) was immediately followed by communal clashes. For example, clashes in the Malabar region. There were no communal clashes during the Civil Disobedience movement.
Statement 3 is incorrect. No majorlabour upsurge was coincided with the movement.
Statement 4 is correct. There was massive participation of peasants and business groups in the Civil Disobedience Movement. Whereas, the business groups across the country mainly remained inactive or pro-British during the Non Cooperation Movement (NCM).",Hint 278,1,2
"Consider the following statements regarding the Nehru Report of 1928.1.Nehru Report recommended Indias independence with the dominion status.2.The central government to be headed by a governor-general, appointed by the British Government3.It accepted the principle of separate electorate.4.M. A. Jinnah voted in favour of the report.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?","1, 3 and 4 only",1 and 3 only,1 and 2 only,"1, 2, 3 and 4",3,"Statement 1 is correct. The Nehru Report advocated Indias Dominion status or independence within the British Commonwealth.
Statement 2 is correct. As per the Nehru Report, Governor General of India would be the constitutional head of India and will have the same powers as that of British Crown.
Statement 3 is incorrect. Nehru Report rejected the principle of separate electorate. Statement 4 is incorrect. M. A. Jinnah did not vote infavour of the report.
The Nehru Report on constitutional reforms as suggested by the Congress was opposed by Muslim hardliners and the Sikh League. Jinnah proposed fourteen points demanding separate electorates and reservation for Muslims in government service and self-governing bodies.
Knowledge Base
TheNehruReportwasofgreathistoricalimportance. The draft report defined the citizenship and fundamental rights.",Hint 279,1,3
"Regarding Simon Commissions recommendations, which of the following statement(s) is /are correct?1.It suggested the abolition of bicameral legislature at the Centre.2.It recommended the replacement of diarchy with responsible government in the provinces.Select the correct answer using the codes given below:",1 only,2 only,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,2,"Only statement 2 is correct.
The Government of India Act of 1919 had introduced the system ofdiarchy to govern the provinces of British India. This act had a provision that a commission would be appointed after 10 years to investigate the progress of the governance scheme and suggest new steps for reform. The Government in England was a conservative Government which was not in very muchfavour of giving any control to Indians. In March 1927, the British government in England announced its decision to appoint the Statutory Commission in advance of the prescribed date. The commission was supposed to be set up in 1929.
The Simon Commission recommended the replacement of diarchy with responsible government in the provinces through a constitutional reconstruction. The commission was infavour of a federal constitution to grant the provinces full autonomy including law.",Hint 280,1,1
Consider the following statements.1.Congress avoided any involvement in Calcutta upsurge of 1945.2.The Calcutta upsurge of 1946 was a reaction to seven-year sentence awarded to Indian National Army officer Rashid Ali.3.Racial discrimination and INA trials were the major causes of the Royal Indian Navy (RIN) Mutiny.Which of the above statement is/are correct?,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,1 only,"1, 2 and 3",2,"Statement 1 is incorrect. Congress participated in the Calcutta upsurge of 1945. The Calcutta upsurge, November 21, 1945: A student procession comprising some Forward Bloc sympathizers, Student Federation of India (SFI) activists andIslamia College students who had tied together the League, Congress and red flags as a symbol of anti-imperialist unity marched to Dalhousie Square—the seat of government in Calcutta.
Statement 2 is correct. Calcutta upsurge, February 11, 1946: The protest was led by Muslim League students in which some Congress and communist students organizations joined. Some arrests provoked the students to defy Section 144. There were more arrests and the agitating students werelathicharged.
Statement 3 is correct. Racial discrimination (demanding equal pay for Indian and white soldiers) and the incidents related to the INA trials were major reasons behind the Royal Indian Navy (RIN) Mutiny.",Hint 281,1,2
Which of the following were Gandhijis famous demands before launching Civil Disobedience movement?1.Introduce total prohibition on liquor2.Abolish land revenue3.Abolish salt tax4.Dominion status to IndiaSelect the correct answer using the code below.,1 and 2 only,2 and 4 only,1 and 3 only,3 and 4 only,3,Introducing total prohibition on liquor and abolish salt tax were Mahatma Gandhis famous demands before launching Civil Disobedience movement.,Hint 282,1,3
Mahatma Gandhi withdrew the Non-Cooperation Movement because1.It was difficult to continue a mass movement for a longer time.2.Gandhi felt that the masses had not fully understood the method of non-violence.3.The government showed reluctance to have a negotiation with the Congress.Select the correct answer using the codes given below:,1 and 2 only,"1, 2 and 3",2 only,1 only,2,"Statement 1 is correct. Mahatma Gandhi felt that people had not learnt or fully understood the method of nonviolence. Incidents likeChauri-Chaura could lead to excitement andfervor, turning the movement generally violent. A violent movement could be easily suppressed by the colonial regime who could use the incidents of violence as an excuse to use the armed might of the state against the protestors.
Statement 2 is correct. The movement was also showing signs of fatigue. This was natural as it is not possible to sustain any movement at a high pitch for very long.
Statement 3 is correct. The Government seemed to be in no mood for negotiations.",Hint 283,1,1
Consider the following set of pairs:1.Moplah Uprising – Against rise in revenue demand and reduction in field size2.Champaran Satyagaraha–Against Tinkathia system3.Kheda Satyagraha–Against oppression by upper castes4.Bardoli Satyagaraha–Against Bargardari BillWhich among the above is/are correctly matched?,1 and 3 only,1 and 4 only,2 and 4 only,1 and 2 only,4,"Kheda Satyagraha: in 1918,Gandhiji learned that the peasants ofKheda district in Gujarat were in extreme distress due to the failure of crops, and that their appeals for the remission of land revenue were being ignored by the government. As the crops were less than one fourth of the normal yield, the peasants were entitled under the revenue code to a total remission of the land revenue.Gandhiji organized Satyagraha and asked the cultivators not to pay land revenue till their demand for remission was met. The struggle was withdrawn; when the government issued instructions that revenue should be recovered only from those peasants who could afford to pay.SardarVallabhbhai Patel was one of the many young persons who becameGandhijis follower during theKheda peasant struggle.
TheBardoli Satyagraha of 1928, in the state of Gujarat, India during the period of the British Raj, was a major episode of civil disobedience and revolt in the Indian Independence Movement. The movement was eventually led byVallabhbhai Patel, and its success gave rise to Patel becoming one of the main leaders of the independence movement.",Hint 284,1,2
Which among the following statements is incorrectly stated?,Wavell Plan provided for an Indian governor general for India.,Mountbatten Plan recommended formation of a boundary commission,Rajagopalachari formula recommended decision on formation of a separate sovereign by north west and north east people by plebiscite.,British Parliament passed Mountbatten Plan as Independence of India Act 1947,1,"Statement (a) is incorrect.
The Wavell Plan recommended to set up a new Executive Council at the Centre in which all but the Viceroy and the Commander in Chief will be Indians. This executive council was for the time being till a new permanent constitution could be agreed upon and come to force.",Hint 285,1,3
"During British Era, the Duke Memorandum became the basis of which among the following?",Nehru Report,Montagu–Chelmsford Reforms,Indian Councils Act 1909,Government of India Act 1935,2,"Duke Memorandum is associated with Sir William Duke, a member of the English Round Table Group and he had formulated a scheme which eventually became the basis of Joint Report of Montague and Chelmsford.",Hint 286,1,1
"ThefirstIndividualSatyagrahi, Acharya Vinoba Bhave offered Satyagraha inwhich among the following way?",By not paying taxes,By burning British Flag,By making an anti-war speech,By making a speech against the Viceroy of India,3,AcharyaVinobaBhave was the first Individual Satyagrahi to be nominated by Mahatma Gandhi. He violated theDefense of India Act by making an anti-war speech.,Hint 287,1,2
Consider the following statements regarding Second World War and nationalist response:1. Mahatma Gandhi advocated an unconditional support to the Allied powers as he made clear distinction between democratic states and totalitarian states.2.Subhash Chandra Bose was in favour of taking advantage of Britains difficulties during the Second World War.3.Jawaharlal Nehru recognized the imperialist nature of the war and wanted to start a mass movement to dislodge colonialism.Which of the statements given above is/are incorrect?,1 and 2 only,3 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,2,"Statement 1 is correct.
Statement 2 is also correct.Subhash Chandra Bose and other socialists argued that the Second World War was an imperialist one since both sides were fighting for gaining or defending colonial territories. They argued that advantage should be taken of the situation to wrest freedom by immediately starting a civil disobedience movement.
Statement 3 is incorrect. Nehru thought that the war was the result of inner contradictions of capitalism. Therefore, he advocated no Indian participation till India was free. At the same time, he was against taking advantage of the difficult situation faced by the British.",Hint 288,1,3
Which of the following is/are feature(s) of Government of India Act 1935?1.Provincial autonomy replaced dyarchy2.Dyarchy was introduced at the Centre3.Direct elections for provinces.Select the correct answer from the code given below.,1 and 3 only,2 and 4 only,3 only,"1, 2 and 3 only",4,"All three are the features the Government of India Act 1935. Moreover, this act also provided the bicameral legislature at the centre.",Hint 289,1,1
Consider the following statements regarding Sayyid Ahmed Khan:1.In the beginning he was an orthodox and communal but later he emphasized on the unity of Hindu-Muslims.2.He established a college in Aligarh to educate Indians about oppression of a foreign rule.3.He advised educationally backward Muslims to focus on modern education rather than politics.Which of the statements given above is/are not correct?,1 only,1 and 2 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 3 only,2,"Statement 1 is incorrect.Infact it was other way around. In his early years, he was an advocate of Hindu-Muslim unity. But in later years, fearing Hindu domination in national movement, he took to communalism and separatism.
Statement 2 is also incorrect. He did not oppose British rule and thought them to be too strong to be dislodged by uneducated Indians. Statement 3 is correct. He wanted Indians to focus on modern scientific education rather than politics.",Hint 290,1,2
"With reference to temple entry movement in Kerala, consider the following statements:1.Gandhiji took a tour in Kerala in support of this movement.2.Many higher caste Hindus organization supported temple entry movement in Kerala.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?",1 only,2 onl,Both 1 and 2,Neither 1 nor 2,3,"Statement 1 iscorrect : In early March 1925,Gandhiji began his tour of Kerala and supported the movement.
Statement 2 iscorrect : Many savarna (or Higher casteHindus) organization like Nair Service Society, NairSamajam and Kerala Hindu Sabha, supported temple entry movement",Hint 291,1,3
"The demand of the Indian National Congress, for a Constituent Assembly was first accepted in principle by the British government in the",Cripps Mission,"Independence of India Act, 1947",August Offer,Cabinet Mission,3,"ThedemandoftheINCof a constituentassembly toframethe Indian constitution was first accepted by the British in the August offer,1940.
The August offer proposed
1. A dominion status as the objective for India
2. Expansion of viceroys executive council
3. Settingupofaconstituentassemblyafter the war where mainly Indians woulddecide theconstitution according to their social,politicaland economicconception, subject to the fulfilment ofobligationsofgovernmentregardingdefence, minorityrights,allIndiaservices, treaties with States.
4. Nofuture constitution to beadopted without the consent of the minoritiesIn response to thisPandit Jawaharlal Nehru stated dominion status concept is dead as a door nail.",Hint 292,1,1
-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-,-
"The provisions of Government of India Act, 1935 were influenced by which of the following documents?1.Indian Statutory Commission report.2.Hartog Committee Report.3.White paper prepared after deliberations at Round Table Conferences.4.Nehru Report.Select the correct answer from the code given below.",2 and 4 only,1 and 3 only,"1, 3 and 4 only","1, 2 and 3 only",3,"Among the principle sources from which the Government of India Act, 1935 drew its material were: 1.Indian Statutory Commission Report (popularly known as Simon Commission report),
2. The report of the All Parties Conference (the Nehru Report),
3. White paper issued after the discussions at the three round table conferences in 1933, which gave details of the working basis of the new constitution of India i.e.dyarchy at the Centre and responsible government.
4. The Joint select committee report and
5. The Lothian report, which determined the electoral provisions of the act.",Hint 293,1,2
Consider following statements about Dr. Ambedkar:1.He was in favour of separate electorate for the Depressed Classes.2.He signed Poona Pact with Gandhiji which provided for separate electorate for the Depressed Classes.3.He opposed partition of India along religious lines.Which of the statements given above is/are correct?,"1, 2 and 3",2 and 3 only,1 only,1 and 3 only,3,"Dr.Ambedkar thought that separate electorate might help in empowerment of lower classes. But according toGandhiji, this might have created a permanent chasm between upper classes and lower classes. SoGandhiji opposed this idea of separate electorate and in opposition of the communal award he started fast unto death which forcedAmbedkar to sign Poona Pact with him and let go his demand of separate electorate,paving way forunstead , reservation of seats for the Depressed Classes in general constituencies. Hence, 1st statement is correct and 2nd statement is incorrect. Dr.Ambedkar was not opposed to partition.Ambedkar, in his treatise Thoughts on Pakistan (1941), held that a Pakistan with peaceful transfer of population is desirable for a strong India with national feeling. Hence, 3rd statement is incorrect.",Hint 294,1,3
The Keys Affair incident is associated with which of the following?,Singapore Mutiny,Komagata Maru incident,Tilaks imprisonment in Mandalay prison,Gurudwara reform movement,4,"In October 1921, the British government made an effort to keep possession of the keys of theToshkhana of the Golden Temple. It led to immediate protests by theAkalis and was a contemporary of the non-cooperation movement.
On 30 April 1908, two Bengali youths,PrafullaChaki andKhudiram Bose, threw a bomb on a carriage atMuzzafarpur, to kill the Chief Presidency Magistrate Douglas Kingsford of Calcutta fame.Tilak, in his paperKesari, defended the revolutionaries and called for immediate Swaraj or self-rule. The Government swiftly arrested him for sedition and sentenced for six years transportation toMadalay prison.
The Singapore mutiny took place in 1915 by the Punjabi Muslim 5th Light Infantry and the 36th Sikh battalion under JamadarChisti Khan, Jamadar AbdulGani andSubedarDaud Khan.
TheKomagataMaru incident involved a Japanese steamship,KomagataMaru, carrying passengers from Punjab, British India who were not allowed to land in Canada, and the ship was forced to return to India.",Hint 295,1,1
Who among the following are associated with the Indian National Army?1.Shah Nawaz Khan2.Rashbehari Bose3.Prem Kumar Sehgal4.Bhulabhai DesaiSelect the correct answer using the code given below:,"1, 2, 3 and 4",3 and 4 only,"1, 2 and 3 only",1 and 2 only,3,"Shah Nawaz commanded the INAbatallion that accompanied the Japanese Army in theImphal Campaign. Rashbehari Bose assistedSubhash Chandra Bose in Singapore.
Prem Kumar Sehgal was one of the INA prisoners of war.
BhulabhaiDesaiwas among the team who organised thedefense of INA prisoners, but not associated with INA.",Hint 296,1,2
"With reference to Tebhaga movement, consider the following statements:1.It was initiated by the Kisan Sabha in Awadh region in UP.2.The demand of the movement was to reduce the share given to landlords.3.It was a non-violent movement based on Satyagraha.Which of the statements given above is/are not correct?","1, 2 and 3",1 and 3 onl,2 and 3 only,1 and 2 only,2,"TheTebhaga movement was an independence campaign initiated in Bengal by theKisan Sabha (peasants front of Communist Party of India) in 1946-1947. At that time share-cropping peasants (essentially, tenants) had to give half of their harvest to the owners of the land. The demand of theTebhaga (sharing by thirds) movement was to reduce the share given to landlords to one third. In many areas the agitations turned violent, and landlords fled villages leaving parts of the countryside in the hands ofKisan Sabha. As a response to the agitations, the then Muslim League ministry in the province launched theBargadari Act, which provided that the share of the harvest given to the landlords would be limited to one third of the total. But the law was not fully implemented.",Hint 297,1,3
Consider the following statements regarding Sayyid Ahmed Khan:1.In the beginning he was an orthodox and communal but later he emphasized on the unity of Hindu-Muslims.2.He established a college in Aligarh to educate Indians about oppression of a foreign rule.3.He advised educationally backward Muslims to focus on modern education rather than politics.Which of the statements given above is/are not correct?,1 and 3 only,2 and 3 only,1 and 2 only,1 only,3,"Statement 1 is incorrect.Infact it was other way around. In his early years, he was an advocate of Hindu-Muslim unity. But in later years, fearing Hindu domination in national movement, he took to communalism and separatism.
Statement 2 is also incorrect. He did not oppose British rule and thought them to be too strong to be dislodged by uneducated Indians. Statement 3 is correct. He wanted Indians to focus on modern scientific education rather than politics.",Hint 298,1,1
